<L>1003<pc>113-a<k1>भगवती<k2>भगवती
BHAGAVATĪ¦. The words Bhagavān and Bhagavatī
mean Paramātmā (universal self) and Prakṛti (Nature
[Page113-b+ 65]
and its modifications) respectively. Prakṛti is also
called by the name Śakti. The following elucidation
once given by Mahāviṣṇu about Bhagavān and Bhaga-
vatī is greatly illuminating.
<div n="NI"/>Time, space, atmosphere and the universe (Brah-
māṇḍam) are, just like Paramātmā, eternal. This is the
truth and reality. Below this eternal Gokula exists
Vaikuṇṭhaloka, which also is, like the former, eternal.
Just like this, Prakṛti, which is a sport to Brahmā and
is also without beginning or end (Sanātanī) too is
eternal. In the same manner as flame exists in fire in-
separable from it, moonlight in moon, beauty in the
lotus flower and brightness in the sun, so does nature
exist in soul inseparable therefrom. In the same way
as the goldsmith cannot make gold ornaments without
gold and the potter cannot make pots without clay, the
Paramātmā will not in the least be able to function
unaided by Prakṛti. Prakṛti (Nature, Devī) is all power-
ful. ‘Para’ becomes powerful enough to do everything
when he joins the Devī.
<div n="NI"/>The sound ‘Śa’ means welfare and good fortune, and
the sound ‘kti’ means prowess. Hence “Śakti” means
the embodiment of welfare and prowess or she, who is
the giver of welfare and prowess. Bhagavatī combines
in herself knowledge, affluence, riches, fame and strength.
As the Paramātmā is always with and inseparable from
such Bhagavatī he is called Bhagavān also. When
Prakṛti and Paramātmā remain combined it is called
Parabrahma, which possesses neither form nor attri-
butes. And, when Prakṛti and Puruṣa separate, of their
own accord, they assume forms and attributes.
<div n="NI"/>The above is Śaiva doctrine in a nut-shell. The
Vaiṣṇavas do not accept this position. They ask, “How
is it possible to have brightness or effulgence without
there being an effulgent one?” Therefore, the Vaiṣṇavas
believe in the existence, at the centre of an effulgent
sphere, of a thing possessing the utmost effulgence and
brightness equal to that of Brahmā. This ‘thing’—
Deva—is very efficient and effective to remedy sorrows
due to birth, death, disease etc. and to him the life-
time of Brahma is just one minute only. This Deva is
called Paramātmā, Parabrahma and Kṛṣṇa by the
Vaiṣṇavas. ‘Kṛṣ’ means maximum devotion (love)
towards Paramātmā, and ‘ṇa’ means he who becomes
slave to such devotion. Hence Kṛṣṇa means he who
becomes a slave to the love of his devotees. There is
another meaning also for the word Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣ means
all and ‘ṇa’ means seed or root; and thus Kṛṣṇa means
he, who is the root of everything. In the very begin-
ning there was only this Kṛṣṇa; and this Lord, sub-
ject only to his own will and pleasure, divided him-
self into two, the left side becoming woman and the
right side man. (Devī Bhāgavata, Navama Skandha).
<LEND>
