<L>1064<pc>118-b<k1>भरत<k2>भरत<h>II
BHARATA II¦. Son of Daśaratha.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Genealogy.%} Descending in order from Viṣṇu-Brahmā-
Marīci-Kaśyapa-Vivasvān-Vaivasvatamanu-Ikṣvāku-
Vikukṣi-Śaśāda-Kakutstha-Anenas-Pṛthulāśva-Prasena-
jit-Yuvanāśva-Māndhātā-Purukutsa-Trasadasyu-
Anaraṇya-Haryaśva-Vasumanas-Sudhanvā-Trayyāruṇa-
Satyavrta-(Triśaṅku)-Hariścandra-Rohitāśva-Harita-
Cuñcu-Sudeva-Bharuka-Bāhuka-Sagara-Asamañjas-
Aṃśumān-Bhagīratha-Śrutanābha-Sindhudvīpa-Ayutā-
yus-Ṛtuparṇa-Sarvakāma-Sudās-Mitrasaha (Kalmāṣa-
pāda)-Aśmaka-Mūlaka-Khaṭvāṅga (Dilīpa, Dīrgha-
bāhu)-Raghu-Aja-Daśaratha-Bharata.
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Birth.%} Daśaratha, King of Ayodhyā, had three wives:
Kausalyā, Kaikeyī and Sumitrā. Kausalyā gave birth
to Śrī Rāma, Kaikeyī to Bharata and Sumitrā to
Lakṣmaṇa and Śatrughna. Kaikeyī, mother of Bharata,
was the sister of Yudhājit, Rājā of Kekeya. Bharata
was born on the day of Pūya. (Śloka 14, Sarga 18,
Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa)
<div n="NI"/>Daśaratha remained in sorrow without children for a
very long time and then he performed a Putrakāmeṣṭi
yāga (A sacrificial ceremony to get children) with
the Maharṣi Ṛṣyaśṛṅga as the officiating priest. From
the sacred fire arose a divine figure carrying a pot of
pudding and it was after taking that pudding that the
wives of Daśaratha became pregnant. (Sarga 15,
Bālakāṇḍa, Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa).
[Page119-a+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Till the end of Śrī Rāma's forest life.%} The sons of
Daśaratha married the daughters of Janaka, King of
Mithilā. Śrī Rāma married Sītā, Bharata, Māṇḍavī,
Lakṣmaṇa, Ūrmilā and Śatrughna, Śrutakīrtī.
<div n="NI"/>Daśaratha made arrangements to crown Rāma as King
and then leave for the forests and lead an ascetic life.
At that time Bharata and Śatrughna were in the
country of Kekaya with their uncle, Yudhājit. When
the day of coronation was drawing near Kaikeyī
demanded of Daśaratha the execution of two boons
which were once promised by Daśaratha to her long
ago during a battle between the devas and asuras. One
of them was to crown her son, Bharata, as king and the
other to send Rāma to the forests for a period of
fourteen years. Daśaratha was shocked to hear that.
But, without any hesitation, Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa
accompanied by Sītā went to the forests and Daśaratha
overcome with immense grief caused by this unplea-
sant turn of events fell down dead. Messengers were
sent then to Kekaya to bring Bharata and after travel-
ling for three days Bharata and Śatrughṇa reached
Ayodhyā. Though they were not informed of the death
of their father they were worried all the way because
of the several bad omens which they saw. On entering
Ayodhyā they were shocked to find all the roads deso-
late and arriving at the palace they found it silent and
gloomy. Kaikeyī then told him all that had happened
and when Bharata knew that his mother was at the
root of all this calamity his rage knew no bounds.
Forgetting himself he drew from the sheath the glitter-
ing sword and stood before his mother with the drawn
sword wavering to strike or not to strike and mused to
himself “No, Not a woman and not one's own mother,
No, it should not be done”. Immediately after this was
decided, he swung the sword straight to his throat.
But adroitly Śatrughna intervened and swept away the
sword before it fell at its aim. This strong move of
Śatrughna brought Bharata to his senses and he looked
at his mother so fiendishly that at his stare his mother
turned pale like a flower brought near a burning flame.
Bharata immediately changed into the dress of a
Sannyāsī and started to go to the forests. Śatrughna
followed his brother. Vasiṣṭha also started. The news
spread like wildfire and people began to crowd at the
palace eager to follow the brothers. Very soon a huge
procession was seen moving towards the forests. Vasiṣṭha
and Arundhatī in a chariot in the front, Kausalyā and
Sumitrā in another next to it and Bharata and Śatru-
ghna closely following the chariots, walking. People
joined the procession from behind. The great crowd
of people reached the banks of the river Gaṅgā. Guha
coming to know of the great exile of people from
Ayodhyā through spies went and saw Bharata, at first
in disguise, and later as himself made his acquaintance.
He then took Bharata and Śatrughna across the river
to the presence of Śri Rāma at Citrakūṭa.
<div n="NI"/>When they reached Citrakūṭa only Bharata-Śatrughna,
Vasiṣṭha and Arundhatī, Kausalyā and Sumitrā entered
the āśrama of Śrī Rāma, all the others remaining out-
side. When Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa were told about the
death of their father they were filled with grief. All the
sons, then, Vasiṣṭha officiating, performed the obsequies
of their father. Rāma and Bharata then discussed the
future. Śrī Rāma persisted in his vow and said he
would return to his country only after fourteen years
[Page119-b+ 65]
and insisted that Bharata should rule the country
during that period. Bharata accepted the arrangement
saying that if his brother did not come back after four-
teen years he would give up his life by jumping into
the fire. Śrī Rāma then gave his sandals to Bharata who
accepting the same with due respect returned home
followed by others. On reaching Ayodhyā Bharata did
not go to the royal palace which he considered as empty
because of the absence of his brother, Rāma and
abhorrent because of the presence of his mother, Kaikeyī.
Instead, he went to a nearby village called Nandi and
installing the sandals there lived there and ruled the
country.
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Return of Śrī Rāma.%} Śrī Rāma when he came back
to Ayodhyā after fourteen years was crowned King.
Bharata got two sons of his wife Māṇḍavī, Subāhu and
Śūrasena. While they were thus living happily in
Ayodhyā, message was sent through an ascetic by
Yudhājit from Kekaya that some gandharvas were
creating trouble in that country. It was the state of
Sindhu in Kekaya which was subjected to this
molestation and on the advice of Rāma Bharata went
and subdued the trouble, killing the gandharvas. He
then created two small states on either side of Sindhu
and made his two sons the Kings of those states.
When Śrī Rāma gave up his life in Sarayū river and
rose to heaven as Viṣṇu Bharata and Śatrughna also
gave up their lives and took the forms of the conch
and the wheel which adorn the hands of Viṣṇu.
(Uttara Rāmāyaṇa).
<LEND>
