<L>1069<pc>123-b<k1>भारत<k2>भारत<h>II
BHĀRATA II¦. (Bhāratavarṣa. India).
<div n="NI"/>The purāṇas describe the Earth to be constituted of
seven continents: Jambūdvīpa, Plakṣadvīpa, Śālmalī-
dvīpa, Kuśadvīpa, Krauñcadvīpa, Śākadvīpa and
Puṣkaradvīpa. Of these India is Jambūdvīpa.
<div n="NI"/>The Bhāratavarṣa was constituted of nine islands at
that time in the following positions: In the centre
was Ilāvṛta and to the east was Bhadravarṣa. To the
south-east was Hiraṇyaka and to the south was Bhārata.
To the southwest was Hari and to the west was Ketu-
māla. To the north-west was Cambaka and to the north
was Kuruvarṣa. Beautiful Kiṃpuruṣa varṣa stood to the
north-east of Ilāvṛta. There was neither the passage of
time nor the fear of ageing or death in any of these
continents excepting Bhāratavarṣa.
<div n="NI"/>This Bhāratavarṣa itself is a group of nine islands
each separated from the other by oceans and thus made
not easily accessible between each other. Indradvīpa,
Kaśerumān, Tāmraparṇa, Gabhastimān, Nāgadvīpa,
Kaṭāha, Siṃhala and Vāruṇa are the eight others and the
ninth is this island of Bhāratavarṣa. This island is called
Kumāra also. On the eastern boundary of this island live
Kirātas, on the western side, Yavanas, on the southern
boundary Āndhras and on the north Turuṣkas. In the
Centre live the Brāhmins, Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas and Śūdras.
The eight sacred mountains of this place are Mahendra,
Malaya, Sahya, Śuktimān, Ṛkṣaparvata, Vindhya and
Pāriyātra. There are several other mountains also in
Madhyapradeśa. They are: Kolāhala, Vaibhrāja, Man-
dara, Durddhara, Vātadhūma, Vaidyuta, Maināka,
Sarasa, Tuṅgaprastha, Nāgagiri, Govardhana, Ujjayan-
ta, Puṣpagiri, Arbuda, Raivataka, Ṛṣyamūka, Gomanta,
Citrakūṭa, Kṛtasmara, Śrīparvata and Koṅkaṇa. This
place is inhabited by Āryas and Mlecchas. The rivers
which they use for drinking water are the following:
<div n="NI"/>Sarasvatī, Pañcarūpā, Kālindī, Hiraṇvatī, Śatadru,
Candrikā, Nīla, Vitastā, Irāvatī, Kuhū, Madhurā,
Hārarāvi, Uśīrā, Dhātakī, Rasā, Gomatī, Dhūtapāpā,
Bahudā, Dṛṣadvatī, Nisvarā, Gaṇḍakī, Citrā, Kauśikī,
Vadhūsara, Sarayū and Lohitya. All these rivers origi-
nate from the base of Himavān. Those originating
from Pāriyātra are: Vedaśmṛti, Vedasvanī, Vṛtraghnī,
Sindhu, Parṇāśā, Nandinī, Pāvanī, Mahī, Śarā, Carm-
maṇvatī, Lūpi, Vidiśā, Veṇumatī, Citrā and Oghavatī.
Those flowing down from the Ṛkṣaparvata are: Śoṇa
alias Mahānada, Narmadā, Surasā, Kriyā, Mandākinī,
Daśārṇa, Citrakūṭā, Devikā, Citrotpalā, Tamasā, Kara-
toyā, Piśācikā, Pippalaśreṇī, Vipāśā, Vañjjulāvatī,
Satsantajā, Śuktimatī, Cakriṇī, Tridivā, Vasu, Valgu-
vāhinī. From the base of Vindhya flow down the follow-
[Page124-a+ 63]
ing rivers: Śivā, Payoṣṇī, Nirvindhyā, Tāpī, Veṇā, Niṣa-
dhāvatī, Vaitaraṇī, Sinībāhu, Kumudvatī, Toyā, Revā,
Mahāgaurī, Durggyā and Antaśśivā. Those originating
from the base of Sahya are the following great rivers:
Godāvarī, Bhīmarathī, Kṛṣṇā, Veṇyā, Saridvatī, Viṣa-
mādrī, Suprayogā, Vāhyā, Kāverī, Dugdhodā, Nalinī,
Vārisenā, and Kalasvanā. Those arising from Śuktimān
are the following: Kṛtamālā, Tāmravarṇī, Vañjjulā,
Utpalāvatī, Śunī and Sudāmā. All these rivers are very
sacred and are considered to be absolvers of sins,
mothers of the universe and wives of oceans. There are
bad rivers also besides these.
<div n="NI"/>The Madhyapradeśa comprises the following states:
Matsya, Kuśūdra, Kuṇḍala, Pāñcāla, Kosala, Vṛka,
Śaka, Barbara, Kaurava, Kaliṅga, Vaṅga, Aṅga and
Marmaka. The states lying to the north are the follow-
ing: Ābhīra, Śāṭhyadhānaka, Bāhlīka, Vātadhāna,
Abhīra, Kālatoyada, Aparānta, Śūdra, Pahlava, Khe-
ṭaka, Gāndhāra, Yavana, Sindhu, Sauvīra, Bhadraka,
Śātadrava, Lalittha, Pārāvata, Mūṣika, Māṭhara, Uruka-
dhāra, Kekaya, Daṃśana, Kāmboja, Darada, Aṅga,
Lokika, Veṇa, Tuṣāra, Bāhya, Todara, Ātreya, Bhāra-
dvāja, Prasthala, Daśeraka, Lambaka, Tāvakārāma,
Cūdika, Taṃgaṇa, Alasa, Ālibhadra, Kirāta, Tāmasa,
Haṃsamārga, Supārśva, Gaṇaka, Kūlūta, Kurhika,
Cūrṇa, Ūrṇapāda, Kukkuṭa, Māṇḍavya and Pāṇavīya.
Those lying to the east are the following:
<div n="NI"/>Aṅga, Vaṅga, Madgurava, Antarggiri, Bahirggiri, Pra-
vaṃga, Vāṃgeya, Māṃsāda, Baladantika, Brahmottara,
Prāvijaya, Bhārgava, Āṅgeya, Marṣaka, Prāgjyotiṣa,
Vṛṣaddhra, Videha, Malla, Tāmraliptaka, Magadha
and Ānanda. The states lying to the south are the
following: Puṇḍra, Kerala, Cola, Kulya, Jānuka, Mūṣi-
kāda, Kumārāda, Mahāśaka, Mahārāstra, Māhiṣika,
Kaliṅga, Ādīra, Vaiśikya, Āraṇya, Śabara, Pulinda,
Vindhyaśaileya, Vidarbha, Daṇḍaka, Paurika, Sārika,
Aśmaka, Bhogavardhana, Naimika, Kuntala, Āndhra,
Udbhida and Nalakāraka. The western states are:
Śūrppāraka, Vāridhāna, Durga, Cālīkaṭa, Pulīya, Sunīla,
Tāmasa, Tāpasa, Kāraskara, Bhūmi, Nāsikānta, Sunarm-
mada, Dārukaccha, Sumāheya, Sārasvata, Vātsiya,
Surāṣṭra, Āvantya and Ārbuda. The following states lie
adjacent to Vindhya: Kārūsa, Ekalavya, Mekala, Utkala,
Uttamarṇa, Daśārṇa, Gopta, Kikarava, Tosala, Kosala,
Traipura, Khelliśa, Turaga, Tuṃbara, Vahela, Niṣadha,
Anūpa, Tuṇḍikera, Vītihotra and Avanti.
<div n="NI"/>There are a few more states which lie attached to moun-
tains: Nirāhāra, Haṃsamārga, Kupatha, Taṃgaṇa,
Khaśa, Kaṭha, Prāvaraṇa, Ūrṇa, Āplaṣṭa, Suhūhuka,
Trigartta, Kirāta, Tomara, Saśikha and Adrika. (Chap-
ter 13, Vāmana Purāṇa).
<div n="NI"/>(See the map of Paurāṇika Bhārata).
<LEND>
