<L>1080<pc>124-b<k1>भर्तृहरि<k2>भर्तृहरि
BHARTṚHARI¦. A famous Sanskrit poet.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Birth.%} He was the son of Vidyāsāgara, a great brahmin
scholar, who lived in Pāṭalīputra. There is a legend
about the birth of Bhartṛhari in Uttara Bhārata.
<div n="NI"/>Vidyāsāgara while young learnt the Vedas from his
guru. But he was not satisfied with that study and
wanted to learn more about all śāstras and so he started
on a tour to find out a guru who would teach him all
he wanted. On his way he met several great scholars
but none came up to his standard of a guru. One day
tired after a long journey he reached a mountain valley.
Washing his hands and feet in a nearby river and
quenching his thirst he went and sat down under a
banyan tree to rest. The cool breeze sent the tired
brahmin to sleep and he slept.
<div n="NI"/>A Brahmarākṣasa who was living on the top of the ban-
yan tree when it became midday descended from
the tree to perform the sacred rites of the day and found
a man lying asleep. By the sacred thread on his body
the Brahmarākṣasa surmised that the man was a brah-
min and woke him up. Waking up Vidyāsāgara found
to his surprise the bearded Brahmarākṣasa standing be-
fore him and after mutual enquiries Vidyāsāgara told
him of his mission. The Brahmarākṣasa told him thus:
“Boy, let your name Vidyāsāgara (ocean of learning)
be true in your life. I am acquainted with many śāst-
ras and I shall teach you everything I know. But there
are certain conditions for the same which you have to
observe. You must live with me for six months and
should fast during that period behaving yourself as
one under a vow. I shall, however, teach you a mantra
which would help you to remain unaffected by hunger,
thirst or sleep. If you are prepared to accept these terms
and become my disciple I shall quench your thirst for
knowledge. Vidyāsāgara willingly agreed to his terms
and became his student.
<div n="NI"/>Both of them then climbed on the banyan tree and the
Brahmarākṣasa sat in his usual place on a branch on
the tree and Vidyāsāgara on a branch just below it. The
instructions started and continued for six months.
Vidyāsāgara never felt thirst or hunger during that
period. When the teaching was complete the Brahma-
[Page125-a+ 64]
rākṣasa bade farewell to his disciple and departed leaving
his body behind.
<div n="NI"/>Vidyāsāgara then got down from the tree and performed
the obsequies of his guru. Vidyāsāgara while he was
learning used to note down the instructions of the guru
on the leaves of the banyan tree. It had come to a huge
bundle on completion. Taking the bundle along with
him Vidyāsāgara left for his country. By the time he
left the forest area the power of the mantra faded and
Vidyāsāgara began to feel the pangs of hunger and
thirst. By dusk he reached Kaliṅga and there he came
to the door of a dancing girl named Mandākinī. The
door was locked as the owner was away in a Śiva temple
nearby. Exhausted by the journey, hungry and thirsty,
Vidyāsāgara lay down on the doorstep and soon fell
asleep with the leaf-bundle as a pillow. Mandākinī when
she returned from the temple at about ten at night saw
a brahmin sleeping on the doorstep, tired and exhaust-
ed. She soon asked her servants to get him inside and
sent for a doctor. By the clever treatment of the doctor
and the expert nursing of Mandākinī, Vidyāsāgara sur-
vived. When he was fit for travel he started to go but
Mandākinī objected and requested him to marry her.
Vidyāsāgara did not agree to it and she took him to the
King and told him all that had happened. Finding
Vidyāsāgara to be one with great erudition and good
manners he decided that Vidyāsāgara should marry
his daughter (a Kṣatriya), daughter of his minister
(a brahmin), daughter of Kulapati (a vaiśya), and
also Mandākinī (a Śūdra). There was an injunction in
those days that a brahmin should marry a Śūdra only
after having married from all the higher castes. The
decision of the King surmounted this difficulty for
Vidyāsāgara to marry the śūdra girl, Mandākinī.
Marriages were all conducted in order. The King's
daughter bore the name Kalāvatī, the minister's Mālatī
and Kulapati's Sumaṅgalī. Each delivered a son. The
brahmin boy was named Vararuci, the Kṣatriya boy,
Vikramāditya, the Vaiśya boy, Bhaṭṭi and the Śūdra
boy, Bhartṛhari.
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Kingship.%} When the King of Kaliṅga became old
he gave the kingdom to Vidyāsāgara and when Vidyā-
sāgara died all his other sons made Bhartṛhari the King.
Bhartṛhari gave his father on his death-bed a promise
that he would see that no sons were born to him.
<F>1) There is a belief that if a son is born to a Śūdra who was himself born of a brahmin the brahmin father would go to hell.</F>
So though Bhartṛhari married three wives he was care-
ful enough not to produce any children by them.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Bhartṛhari becomes a sannyāsī.%} Bhartṛhari was living
happily with his wife when one day a yogī of divine
disposition came to his house and giving him a ripe
mango said: “If you eat this mango you will never
become old. It is because you who are perfect in edu-
cation and fortune should live long for the benefit of
the people that I am giving you this.” So saying he
gave the mango and left the place. When the sannyāsī
left him Bhartṛhari thought thus: “After some years
my wife would become old and die. What is the use
of my remaining alive after she is gone. So this mango
should be given to her. Let her live long.” He,
therefore, gave the mango to his wife explaining
to her the greatness of the fruit. That wife whom poor
Bhartṛhari accepted to be very loving and chaste
had a lover. He was none other than the horse-
[Page125-b+ 64]
groom of her husband and that prostitute thought
thus: “Of what use is my life when my lover is dead.
Let him live for ever”. So thinking she sent for her
lover and giving him the mango explained to him the
greatness of the thing. But the horse-groom was well
devoted to his wife and desiring that his wife should
remain young always he gave it to her. The groom's
wife was a servant-maid of the palace and it was at the
time of her departure from the palace after her day's
work that she was given the mango by the horse-groom
and so she carried it home in her hand. Bhartṛhari
who was returning from somewhere to the palace saw
the woman carrying the mango and questioned her and
knew how she got it. On coming to the palace he sent
for the horse-groom and though at first the horse-groom
tried to shield the queen, he was compelled to tell the
truth in the end. The truth pained him much “Phew!
It was this wretched and unfaithful woman whom I was
believing to be very chaste and loving. Woman can never
be believed. Look, she has fallen in love with an ugly-
looking servant of mine and unless he was her lover she
would not have given this mango to him. It is better
that this matter is not pursued any further now. We
will decide about the future course of action later”.
Thinking thus, he sent away the horse-groom and went
to his bed-chamber and lay there immersed in thoughts.
The horse-groom immediately informed the queen of
everything that took place and the queen felt sorry that
her secret had come to light. She knew that besides the
punishment that her lover would get her name would
also be blackened and so decided to kill her husband
before the affair became public. At once she made an
oṭṭaṭa (flat bread made of wheat or rice) with poison in
it and bringing it to the bed-room told her husband thus
with much pretended affection. “It will take some time
for your lunch to be ready. Let not you lie with an
empty stomach. Eat this now”. So saying she placed
the bread in the hands of Bhartṛhari and left the room.
<div n="NI"/>Bhartṛhari suspected foul play and mused “This bread
has been prepared by her with poison to kill me. It is
better to give up living with her. There is no doubt
about it. Of the four āśramas the fourth, Sannyāsa, is
the best. It is pleasant and sorrowless. Therefore gra-
dually that āśrama should be accepted”. Thinking thus
he came out from his room with the bread and placed
it hidden somewhere in the lower end of the roof of the
house remarking “Oṭṭappam Vīṭṭeccuṭum” (The oṭṭaṭa
will burn the house). Then taking an earthern bowl for
begging he left the house unnoticed by any. The moment
Bhartṛhari left the house the house caught fire and
everything in it was burnt to ashes.
<div n="NI"/>Bhartṛhari renouncing all and changing himself into
the robes of a sannyāsī went about living by begging.
After some time he decided that he would never beg but
would eat only that which others gave him voluntarily.
He had by that time reached a big temple
<F>2) This temple is believed to be the Chidaṃbaraṃ Temple.</F> in south
India where in one of the entrances to the temple, the
east one, was sitting the famous sannyāsī Paṭṭanatt
Pillayār. Bhartṛhari, therefore, went and sat at the
western entrance with his bowl before him. Whatever
food fell into the bowl was eaten by him. Sometimes
for days together he went without food. But he never
was sick or felt weak.
[Page126-a+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>One day a beggar went to the eastern gate and asked
Paṭṭanatt Pillayār for alms. Pillayār said, “I am also a
beggar like you. I have nothing in my hand to give you.
But there is a man sitting in the western gate. He is a
rich man and he may give you something”. The beggar
went to Bhartṛhari and asked for alms. Bhartṛhari
also expressed his helplessness in the matter. But then
the beggar said “The man sitting at the opposite entrance
told me that you were a rich man.” Bhartṛhari smiled.
He knew then why Paṭṭanatt Pillayār said so. A man who
has renounced everything need not keep even a bowl to
beg. The bowl was a luxury and a sign of wealth.
Bhartṛhari threw away the bowl and remained at the
temple entrance till the end of his life. It was while
sitting there that he wrote his famous poems.
<div n="NI"/>4) His well-known works are: (1) The Nīti Śataka (2)
The Śṛṅgāra Śataka (3) The Vairāgya Śataka and (4)
The Subhāṣitas.
<LEND>
