<L>1214<pc>144-a<k1>भुशुण्ड<k2>भुशुण्ड
BHUŚUṆḌA¦. A dispassionate and large-hearted crow.
The residence of this crow was a Kalpavṛkṣa standing
on a beautiful peak surrounded by luxuriant vegetation
in the north-eastern corner of Mahāmeru. There were
numerous bird-nests on the southern branch of that
Kalpavṛkṣa. In one of them lived this centuries-old
bird.
<div n="NI"/>Once when the sage Vasiṣṭha went to Devaloka, he
happened to hear about this crow. He went to see
Bhuśuṇḍa in its nest. The crow recognised Vasiṣṭha
at once. They exchanged greetings. The sage opened
the conversation as follows:—“Oh, King of birds!
when were you born? How did you become a great
soul? How old are you? Have you recollections of the
past? Who was the prophet who suggested this residence
for you?”
<div n="NI"/>The bird calmly replied as follows:—“If you are interes-
ted in hearing my past history I shall tell you. Lord
Śaṅkara the Almighty lives in this world. He has numer-
ous attendant spirits. Besides these spirits who have
hoofs on their head, hands in the hoofs, teeth in
the hands and stomach in the face, and who have faces
resembling those of monkeys, camels, and elephants,
he has also hordes of Mātṛs in his retinue. The Mātṛs,
attended by spirits continue their dance in the presence
of the Lord. Mountain peaks, the sky, the different
worlds, deep pits, cremation grounds, etc. are their
haunts. Chief among these Mātṛs are eight sisters
named, Jayā, Vijayā, Jayantī, Aparāhitā, Siddhā,
Raktā, Alambuṣā and Ulpalā. They have other follow-
ers also. Alambuṣā's vehicle is the crow named Caṇḍa.
[Page144-b+ 65]
All these Mātṛs assembled together on one occasion to
celebrate a festival in the sky. There was a display of
many kinds of entertainments at that time. Disputations
in spiritual matters, music, dancing, drinking and other
forms of hilarious activities were freely indulged in.
In another part of the sky, their vehicles were also
enjoying themselves with similar celebrations of drinking,
dancing, and merry-making. The swans who were the
vehicles of Brāhmīdevī were dancing in one place,
intoxicated by drink. Caṇḍa, the crow, who was Alam-
buṣā's vehicle, also joined their company. Completely
absorbed in their delirious raptures, the intoxicated
swans indulged so freely in their amorous pleasures with
Caṇḍa that they became pregnant. At last when the
merry-makings ended and all of them dispersed, the swans
became aware of their plight and informed Brāhmī
about it. The gracious goddess (Brāhmī) told them
that in their present state they were unable to discharge
their duties in drawing her chariot and so they were allow-
ed to go and enjoy themselves wherever they liked. After
this she entered into a trance. The swans in the fullness
of time, gave birth to twentyone sons. We, the twenty-
one brothers, are those children. We and our mothers
went to Brāhmīdevī and offered worship to her for a
long time. As a result, the Devī woke up from her trance
and pleased with us, gave us her blessing. After that,
we went to our father (Caṇḍa) and off red our devoted
services to him and prostrated before him and Alam-
buṣādevī. They blessed us. We asked our father to
suggest a most suitable place for a secluded life. This
Kalpa Vṛkṣa is the secluded place recommended by
him. We paid obeisance to our father and Alambu-
ṣādevī and came to settle down here. Many ages have
passed since then. Now your visit and holy presence
here, have liberated me from all worldly bonds and
ennobled my life. My twenty brothers lived for many
Kalpas and yugas at the end of which, convinced of the
meaninglessness of worldly life, renounced their bodies
and attained Śivaloka.
<div n="NI"/>On hearing this, Vasiṣṭha asked Bhuśuṇḍa to tell him
more about his past life. Bhuśuṇḍa resumed his story:—
“Long long ago, the whole earth was full of big rocks,
without trees, forests or mountains. After a great flood
the surface of the earth was covered with ashes. In
one caturyuga (a period equal to the length of the four
yugas, Kṛta, tretā, dvāpara and Kali) the earth was
filled with forest trees and in another Caturyuga, moun-
tain ranges appeared. I have seen an age in which
Brāhmaṇas were drunkards, Śūdras were virtuous and
women of noble families committed adultery. You
have now been born in the eightieth “Janma” as the
son of Brahmā. You were born once from the sky, at
another time from water, then from the mountain and
again from fire. I can remember this earth sinking into
the ocean five times and Lord Viṣṇu taking the form of
a tortoise, lifting it up, above the water. I have seen the
ocean of milk being churned twelve times. I know that
Hiraṇyākṣa had taken the earth three times to Pātāla
(underworld). The Lord has incarnated six times as
Bhārgava Rāma. Incarnation of Buddha has taken
place in six Kaliyugas. Tripuradahana (burning of
the Tripurāsuras) has taken place thirty times. Dakṣa
yāga was broken up twice. Lord Śiva has slain ten
Indras. He fought seven times with Śrī Kṛṣṇa for the
sake of Bāṇa. I also remember another epic entitled
[Page145-a+ 65]
“Rāmāyaṇa”, containing one lakh of verses and dealing
with metaphysical problems. I have seen the customs
of Kṛtayuga being followed in Kaliyuga and the customs
of Kaliyuga being followed in Kṛtayuga.”
<div n="NI"/>Having heard the whole story, Vasiṣṭha gave his blessing
to Bhuśuṇḍa and left the place. (Jñāna Vāsiṣṭha,
Bhu uṇḍopākhyāna).
<LEND>
