<L>1245<pc>146-b<k1>बोधिसत्त्व<k2>बोधिसत्त्व
BODHISATTVA¦. A good-natured husband generally
quoted in Sanskrit works. The following is the story
given about him in Kathāsaritsāgara, Taraṅga 9.
<div n="NI"/>Once there lived a wealthy Vaiśya, who had a son named
Bodhisattva. When the childhood of the boy was at an
end his mother died. The Vaiśya married again and got
his son also married. Because of the ear-buzzing of his
wife, the Vaiśya drove his son out of the house. Bodhi-
sattva left the house of his father, with his wife. By
and by they reached a desert. Not a drop of water was to
be had. There was not even the shoot of a grass. It was a
sandy place with nothing else in sight. He walked for
seven days carrying his wife on his shoulders. His wife
grew weary and worn with hunger and thirst. Seeing
that she was about to die he gave her his flesh and blood.
The wicked woman took them and saved herself from
death. On the eighth day they reached the jungles of a
hilly place full of fruit-trees and with a river with grassy
banks, flowing down to the valley. With fruits and cool
water he appeased the hunger and thirst of his wife.
Then he got down to the river to take a bath. He saw
a man with his limbs cut off, coming afloat. Now and
then he was producing pitiable sounds. The kind son of
the Vaiśya, without minding his weakness due to fast for
the last seven days, swam to the man and brought him to
the bank of the river. He did all services possible for him.
Then he asked him who had cut off his limbs. He rep-
lied that his enemies had done so, with the intention that
he might die suffering severe pain for a long time. The
Vaiśya's son stood still for a little while. Then he took
his bath. With his wife he lived in the forest doing
penance. The wounds of the man he saved had been
healed. The Vaiśya's son, one day, went out to the
forest to gather fruits and roots for their food. At that
time his wife grew lustful and had coition with the man
without limbs. Gradually she began to dote on him. She
decided to kill her husband who was an impediment on
her way. She pretended to be ill. The Vaiśya's son began
to treat her. One day she took her husband to the edge of
a very deep well and said: “See, there is a divine herb at
the bottom of this well. I will be cured if I could eat it.
This is what a goddess told me in a dream yesternight”.
Hearing this her husband made a rope, and tied it to a
tree. Then he began to go down the well by the rope.
She cut the rope and the man fell into the well. There
was a passage from the well to the river. The current
took him through that passage to the river. He got out of
the river, and sat under a tree thinking of the wickedness
of women. There was a city close by. At that time the
King of the city was dead and there was no heir left. The
subjects of the city brought an elephant and said, “whom
ever this elephant takes and places on his back shall be
our king”. They sent the elephant out. The elephant
[Page147-a+ 64]
was pleased at the virtuous character of the son of the
Vaiśya. So taking him, as if he was God, placed him on
its back and walked to the city. The people gathered
round him and anointed him as their King. The son of
the Vaiśya became King. He never even thought of
women who are generally fickle and wicked.
<div n="NI"/>The wicked wife of the Vaiśya's son took the limbless
man on her shoulder and wandered about saying, “The
enemies of my husband have put him in this plight.
Because of my conjugal fidelity I carry him thus and
earn our daily bread. Please give us alms”. In this
manner she spent her days in begging. Thus wandering
from place to place she reached the city where the
Vaisya's son was the King. The people, seeing her
loyalty to her husband, honoured her and spoke highly
of her. Hearing that a very loyal wife had reached his
city the King sent for her. The King recognized her
instantly. But she did not know him. The King reminded
her of her deeds of the past one by one and began to
tease and scold her. Finally when she understood that
the King was her husband she was dumb-founded. The
amazed ministers looked at each other. The King reveal-
ed everything to them. The ministers disfigured her and
drove her away.
<LEND>
