<L>1254<pc>155-b<k1>ब्रह्मचर्य<k2>ब्रह्मचर्य
BRAHMACARYA¦. In ancient India an ideal life was
considered to pass through four stages, and Brahma-
carya is one of the stages of life. The four stages
are Brahmacarya (Vedic student vowed to chastity),
Gārhasthya (married householder), Vānaprastha (forest
hermit) and Sannyāsa (an ascetic who has renounced
the world). Brahmacarya, the first stage of the four
is considered as the period of education. The rules and
conduct of a Brahmacārī are given in Manusmṛti,
Chapter 2.
<div n="NI"/>The brahmacārī who lives with the teacher has to obey
certain rules and principles. He should bathe in the
river at sun-rise and offer oblations to gods and manes.
A brahmacārī has to abstain from using honey, meat,
fragrance, flowers, flower of chrysanthemum (Ind.)
women, curd, milk, ghee, churned-curd, slaughter,
bath applying oil, anointing the eyes with collyrium,
sandals, umbrella, lust, anger, covetousness, dance,
music, gambling, slander, ridicule, falsehood, and
causing injury to others. A Brahmacārī should go to
bed alone. Semen should not be made to discharge
through lust. If seminal discharge occurs in dream he
should take bath early in the morning and worship the
Sun, pronouncing the mantra or spell ‘Punaḥ’ thrice.
The Brahmacārī should live on alms. It is the duty of
the brahmacārī to bring water, flower for oblation,
cowdung, soil and darbha (grass) for the teacher. He
should receive alms only from the houses of those who
believe in the Vedas and sacrifices. He should not go
to the house of his teacher or his heirs and their families
for alms. Provided there are no other houses he may
receive alms from the houses of his teacher's relatives
and in the absence of such houses he may approach
the houses of heirs to his teacher and in the absence
of such houses he may receive alms from the house of
the teacher. He should fetch ‘Camata’ (fuel chiefly
from butea frondosa) from a place of purity in the
[Page156-a+ 65]
forest, as instructed in rules and dry it in the sun; in
the absence of which it may be got dried in a sheltered
place. This fuel should be put in the sacrificial fire in
the mornings, at noons, and in the evenings. If a healthy
Brahmacārī fails in doing his duties consecutively for
seven days it will be considered that his vow of Brahma-
carya is broken and then he will have to take the vow
of ‘Avakīrṇi’ again. Without waiting for the order of
the teacher, the Brahmacārī (student) should engage
himself in devotion and meditation and in the service
of the teacher daily. When the student is before the
teacher he should stand with folded hands controlling
his body, speech, brains, sensitive organs, and mind.
Only when he is asked to sit, should he do so before
the teacher, covering the portions of his body, which
are to be covered, with clothes. He should rise up in
the morning before his teacher wakes up, and go to
bed only after the teacher has retired for sleep. When
his teacher calls him, he should not give reply lying,
sitting, walking, eating or looking in the opposite
direction. He should not gainsay the teacher. The
student should attend to the orders of the teacher and
comply with them, sitting if the teacher is sitting,
standing if the teacher is standing, standing back if the
teacher is advancing towards him, running behind if
he is walking, standing close by when he is facing the
opposite direction, folding his limbs when the teacher
is lying or sitting near. The student should have his
seat and bed one step lower than those of his teacher.
The student should not sit in a careless manner in
places where the teacher's eyes could reach. He should
not utter the name of his teacher. If anybody speaks ill
of his teacher he should close his ears and run away
from the spot. If a Brahmacārī scoffs his teacher, he
will be born as a donkey, and as a dog if he scorns him,
and as a worm if he steals the wealth of his teacher
and as a beetle if he becomes jealous at the greatness
of his teacher. When the teacher is angry the brahma-
cārī should not go near him. The Brahmacārī should
not speak unasked. A Brahmacārī could sit with his
teacher only when they are in a vehicle, or on a camel
or in a tower or on the steps or on rocks or in a boat. He
should consider the teacher of his teacher as his teacher.
He should not address his parents who visit the house
of the teacher, without the permission of his teacher. He
should respect learned men, holy men, sons of the
teacher and those who are born of his family, as a
teacher. If the wife of the teacher is of the caste of the
teacher, the brahmacārī should consider her as his
teacher. If the wife is not of the same caste the brahma-
cārī needs only to stand up and make obeisance to her.
A brahmacārī should not apply oil to the body of his
teacher's wife, wash her, massage her body, and comb
her hair. A brahmacārī may either shave his head or
grow matted hair. He should never be asleep at sunrise
or sunset. For learning Vedas etc. the student should not
give the teacher cows, clothes etc. as free gifts before-
hand. On completion of education, when the student
asks the teacher for permission to get married, he should
give the teacher what he demands. A brahmacārī who
has fully complied with the rules mentioned above,
will attain heaven after his death.
<LEND>
