<L>1255<pc>156-a<k1>ब्रह्मदत्त<k2>ब्रह्मदत्त<h>I
BRAHMADATTA I¦. A famous king of Kāṃpilyapura.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Birth.%} Brahmadatta was born in the family of
Bṛhatkṣatra who was a scion of the Solar dynasty.
[Page156-b+ 65]
Bṛhatkṣatra begot Suhotra, Suhotra begot Hasti, Hasti
begot Ajamīdha, Ajamīdha begot Bṛhadiṣu, Bṛhadiṣu
begot Bṛhaddhanus, Bṛhaddhanus begot Bṛhaddharmā,
Bṛhaddharmā begot Satyajit, Satyajit begot Viśvajit,
Viśvajit begot Senājit and Senājit begot Rucira, Rucira
begot Pṛthusena, Pṛthusena begot Nīpa, Nīpa begot
Para, Para begot Pṛthu, Pṛthu begot Sukṛta, Sukṛta be-
got Vibhrāja, Vibhrāja begot Aṇuha, and Aṇuha mar-
ried Kṛtvī, the daughter of hermit Śukra. Brahmadatta
was born to Aṇuha by Kṛtvī.
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Previous birth and kingship.%} In Padmapurāṇa, Part
III, Chapter 10, there is a story stating how the
seven sons of Kauśika, a hermit, became fishermen by
a curse and how they got absolution and attainment
of heaven by offering oblations to the manes. The
story is given below. Brahmadatta was the rebirth of
Pitṛvartti, one of those seven sons.
<div n="NI"/>In days of old there was a hermit named Kauśika in
Kurukṣetra. His seven sons, Śvarūpa, Krodhana,
Hiṃsra, Piśuna, Kavi, Vāgduṣṭa and Pitṛvartti were
studying under Garga, a teacher. Their deeds were as
bad as their names indicated. Their father died. The
sons were in want. There was no rain anywhere in the
world. These brothers had taken the milking cow of
their teacher Garga to the forest for grazing. They
decided to kill the cow of their teacher. The youngest
of them said, “If we kill the cow we can use it as
offerings to the manes, and the sin will not be visited
on us.” The elder brothers agreed to it. Accordingly
Pitṛvartti killed the cow and began sacrifice to the
manes. Two of the elder brothers were detailed to give
oblations to the devas, and three of them to offer
oblations to the manes. One was detailed to be the
guest and himself as the sacrificer. Thus remembering
the manes the sacrifice was completed with the neces-
sary rituals. In short, those seven hermits got divine
power and became daring wicked men and ate the cow
of their teacher. They told the teacher that the cow
was eaten by a leopard and gave him the calf.
<div n="NI"/>In course of time they all died and were born again as
wild men in Daśapura. But because of their offerings to
the manes they had retained memory of their previous
births. So they fasted in holy baths and discarded their
lives before the people. They were born again as deer
in the mount of Kālañjara. Because of the power of
knowledge and the penance and fast they discarded
the body of deer in Prapatana and got rebirth as
Cakravāka (ruddy goose) in the lake called Mānasa-
saras. In this birth their names were Sumanas, Kusuma,
Vasu, Citradarśi, Sudarśi, Jñāta and Jñānapāraga,
names suitable to their character. Those seven loving
brothers were saints by virtue of their harmony with
the Supreme spirit. But owing to mental disturbance
three of them lost their attainments. Seeing the plea-
sures that King Aṇuha of Pāñcāla was enjoying by
his wealth, vehicles, big army and beautiful women
one of the Cakravākas, Pitṛvartti, the devoted Brāh-
maṇa, who being loyal to his father had performed
sacrifice and given offerings to the manes, desired to
become a king. The other two brothers seeing the
wealth, glory and power of the two ministers, wished
to become ministers. Thus Pitṛvartti was born as the
son of Aṇuha with the name Brahmadatta and the
other two were born as Puṇḍarīka and Subālaka, sons of
the two ministers. Brahmadatta was anointed as King of
[Page157-a+ 65]
Pāñcāla in the great city of Kāṃpilya. The King
loved his father. He was mighty and powerful. He was
regular in performing sacrifices and giving offerings to
the manes. He had the attainment of harmony with
the supreme spirit. He understood the thought and
speech of birds and animals. He married Sannati, the
daughter of Sudeva (Devala); she was in her former
birth the cow of Garga.
<div n="NI"/>Once as the King was walking in the garden with his
wife, he saw two ants. The minute creatures, who
were husband and wife were engaged in a petty quar-
rel. The male one, with loving words, pacified the
female one, who instantly came close to her husband
and they became happy. The King felt amazed at this
conversation of the ants, and he laughed. Because of
the attainments of his previous lives, he had the power
to understand the language of animals, birds, etc.
Seeing the King laughing without any reason the queen
Sannati asked him why he laughed. She said that
there was no reason whatsoever for the king to laugh
just then. The King replied, “Oh, beautiful one! just
now there was a quarrel between a female and a male
ant. I heard it, That is why I laughed. There is no
other reason.” The queen did not believe the King.
She thought that the King had been scoffing her. She
asked him how he came to understand the language
of such creatures. The King could not answer her
question. He fasted for seven days. On the seventh
day Brahmā appeared before him and told him, “The
King will know everything from the words of a
Brāhmin, whom he would meet when he goes to walk
in the streets.”
<div n="NI"/>Brahmadatta returned to the palace and spent the
night there. Next morning he started with his wife and
ministers, for a walk. When they left the palace they
saw an old Brahmin coming towards them. Seeing the
king the Brāhmin recited a verse:
<Poem>“Brāhmaṇas in Kurukṣetra
which seven as wild men in Daśapura?
Stags in Kālañjara, ruddy geese in Mānasa,
Then, are we, now living here”.</Poem>
<div n="NI"/>When the King heard this verse the memory of his
former births revived and he fell down in a swoon.
<div n="NI"/>There is a reason why the old Brāhmin recited the
verse. The Ruddy geese mentioned before took their
next birth as sons of a poor Brāhmin in the same city.
They had the memory of their previous births. They
were called Dhṛtimān, Sarvadarśi, Vidyācandra and
Tapodhika, names suitable to their character. The
Brahmin boys decided to go for penance to attain su-
preme bliss. Then the poor father asked them, “My dear
sons, what is this? You are going away leaving your
poor and aged father. Is that dutiful? The sons replied,
“We will tell you a way to earn wealth. You recite to
the King, to-morrow morning this verse, which we
will teach you now. You will get plenty of wealth.”
The boys taught their father this verse and then they
went to the forest. Their father, the old Brahmin, came
to the gate of the palace at Kāṃpilya. The King was
Brahmadatta.
<div n="NI"/>There is another story how Brahmadatta became the
King of this place. Long ago Aṇuha, the King of Pāñcāla
did penance before Brahmā, who appeared before the
King and asked him what he desired. The King made
his request that he might have a son who should be a
[Page157-b+ 64]
mighty hero, a learned man, a great hermit and who
could understand the language of all living creatures.
Brahmā granted him boon and thus Brahmadatta was
born to Aṇuha. It was before this Brahmadatta that
the Brāhmaṇa recited his verse and it was that King
who swooned and fell down.
<div n="NI"/>The two ministers were Subālaka the son of Bābhravya
who was the author of the Kāmaśāstra and Puṇḍarīka
the son of Pāñcāla who propagated the science of
medicine. They also remembered about their former
births and also fell down unconscious. When they
recovered the King Brahmadatta and the minister
Subala and Puṇḍarīka bemoaned the loss of powers
they had attained before by devotion, meditation,
penance and sacrifice. They cried, “Fate has made us
desirous of the objects of our senses and we have lost our
harmony with the Supreme Spirit.” They repeated the
cry again and again and they spoke about the blessings
obtained by offering oblation to their manes. Brahma-
datta gave the old Brāhmaṇa plenty of wealth and
several villages and sent him fully satisfied. Then he
anointed his capable and fully qualified son Viṣvaksena
as King and with his retinue retired to Mānasa-saras
for penance.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%A bird as his wife when he was King.%} When Brahma-
datta was the King of Kāṃpilyapura a bird named
Tapanīyā become his friend. Her head was purple
coloured and body black. By and by this bird became
his wife. A daughter named Sarvasenā was born to
Brahmadatta by his bird-wife. The King had sons by
other wives. Tapanīyā would wash her child and place
her in the cradle early in the morning and then
go to the forest and fly about in the air. She would
return in the evening and tell the King news all over
the world. It went on like this for a long time.
<div n="NI"/>Once, when there was nobody in the room a prince
took Sarvasenā from the cage and choked her to death.
Tapanīyā returned and seeing the dead body of her
daughter, waited for a long time. Finally she pecked
out the eyes of the prince and flew away into the air.
(Harivaṃśa, Chapter 20).
<LEND>
