<L>1258<pc>158-a<k1>ब्रह्मदत्त<k2>ब्रह्मदत्त<h>IV
BRAHMADATTA IV¦. A king who ruled over the coun-
try of Kāśi. One night he saw two swans flying in the
air. They were of golden colour. There were a num-
ber of swans around them. They seemed like two
lightnings in the midst of white clouds. Brahmadatta
wished to see them again. His desire increased to such
an extent that he had desire for nothing else. He
consulted his ministers and made a lake. Every crea-
ture which seemed beautiful to him was brought to
that place. Hearing this those two swans also came
there. By and by he tamed them and asked them how
they got the golden colour. The swans said thus:
“Oh King! you might have heard of the famous moun-
tain Mandara, which is the field of games of the Devas
(gods). At the time of the churning of the milk sea
when this mountain was used as churn-drill, Amṛtaṃ
(celestial nectar of immortality) touched this moun-
tain. So the flowers, fruits and roots in the vicinity of
this mountain got the power of removing death, wrin-
kles etc. Candracūḍa also will come to this mountain
occasionally to play on the top of it and so it became
more glorious than the mount Kailāsa. One day
while Mahādeva was playing in those gardens he had
to leave on an urgent matter concerning Gods. So he
left Pārvatī there and went away. Devī began to walk
about in those gardens with pangs of separation.
Spring season came. The Gaṇas (servants of Śiva) and
the maids of Pārvatī attended on her. One day Maṇi-
puṣpeśvara, a Gaṇa, hankered after Candralekhā,
daughter of Jayā. She had been engaged in fanning
Pārvatī. Both were young and their figures suited each
other. Candralekhā reciprocated his love. Under-
standing this Piṅgeśvara and Guheśvara, two gaṇas
looked at each other and smiled. Seeing this Devī
looked round with anger to see what caused them to
smile. They squinted their eyes and showed Manipuṣ-
pe vara and Candralekhā to Devī. Because of separation
she had been much worried, weary and sad. So all
these affairs made her angry. She said: “It is good
that you behave like this when I am in this plight !
The two are making love. Seeing that, you are laughing.
May these two dotards be born on the earth and be-
come husband and wife there. Let you two who
laughed before me without humility also be born on
the earth, first as poor Brāhmaṇas, and then as
Brahmarakṣas (demon friends), outcasts, robbers,
dogs with tails cut off and finally as various kind of
birds.” Thus she cursed the four of gaṇas. Then a
gaṇa named Dhūrjaṭa said to Pārvatī: “Devī, this is
unfortunate. They have not committed any severe
crime.” Devī got angry at him and cursed him too:
“May you also be born on the earth as a human be-
ing.” After this Jaya the loved maid of Pārvatī reques-
ted her for absolution from curse, for all. The Devī
said that all of them would get absolution at the place
of penance of Brahmā and other gods and would re-
turn here. Of these, Candralekhā and her husband and
Dhūrjaṭa would be happy on the earth. The two
others would lead a miserable life on the earth.”
(Kathāsaritsāgara, Padmāvatīlaṃbaka, Taraṅga 1).
<LEND>
