<L>1267<pc>158-b<k1>ब्रह्माण्ड<k2>ब्रह्माण्ड
BRAHMĀṆḌA¦. The word Brahmāṇḍa means the aṇḍa
of Brahmā (aṇḍa-egg), the Supreme Being which is
the root of the origin of the universe. At a time long
ago, which is beyond reckoning, there was nothing but
an egg. This egg was split into two and from it a male
[Page159-a+ 64]
child with the radiance of innumerable suns came out.
This wonderful child was helpless. After his birth he
cried for a while, because of hunger and thirst. He
got no help. There was nobody to feed it. So this
wonderful child looked up and lay there. This help-
less child was called ‘Virāṭpuruṣa’ (the next emanation
from Brahmā) by those versed in the Purāṇas. The
boy was so called because he was the most material
of materiality. But he was an atom of atoms and the
first figuration of God. From each pore of the skin of
the great virāṭ, who was the base of all the worlds a
universe came into being. Thus all the countless uni-
verses were born. Each universe has its own trinity of
Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva and devas (the bright ones), the
protectors of the eight zones. One universe comprises
fourteen worlds or realms, from Pātāla to the Brahma-
loka (from the nether world to the upper world or
the realm of Brahmā). Countless such universes exist.
Over and above all these universes there is Vaikuṇṭha,
and above Vaikuṇṭha there is another world with an
area of fifty crore yojanas (leagues), called ‘Goloka’ (the
world of cow). Only the two worlds Vaikuṇṭha and
the Goloka are eternal. Bhūloka (the earth) consists
of seven islands and sixty-four peninsulas. There are
seven worlds above and seven worlds below. The seven
upper worlds are Bhūloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka, Jana-
loka, Tapoloka. Satyaloka and Brahmaloka. Thus a
universe consists of fourteen worlds. This is the idea
given by the Purāṇas about Brahmāṇḍa. (Devī Bhāga-
vata, Skandhas 9).
<div n="NI"/>Mention is made, in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, Aṃśa 2,
Chapter 7, about the construction of Brahmāṇḍa.
<div n="NI"/>This Brahmāṇḍa, like the seed of the Kapittha tree
(Vitar—the wood-apple), is covered under, above and
all around by aṇḍakaṭāha (egg-shell). The aṇḍa (egg)
is covered by water ten times the egg in volume. This
water-shell is covered by a shell of fire. Around the
shell of fire there is the shell of air and the air-shell
is covered with ether. Around the shell of ether there
is the shell of Egoism of darkness. Over the shell of
Egoism there is the shell of glory and the shell of
glory is covered by Prakṛti, the Divine Nature. It is
immeasurable. Prakṛti contains numberless Brah-
māṇḍas. As oil exists in sesame, God pervades the whole
universe. This is the connection between Prakṛti and
Puruṣa. (The Nature and the Supreme Spirit).
<LEND>
