<L>1415<pc>168-b<k1>चाणक्य<k2>चाणक्य
CĀṆAKYA¦ (KAUṬILYA). The famous author of
“Arthaśāstra” a treatise on political economy.
<div n="NI"/>Eastern and western scholars have made exhaustive
researches on this intellectual giant of ancient India,
Cāṇakya. But, nothing definite has yet been established
about his time or life. Indians have accepted as a fact
the traditional legend that he was a minister of Candra-
gupta, the founder of the Maurya dynasty. It is also
firmly believed that it was this mighty intellect of a
brahmin who made Candragupta a powerful emperor
and steered the ship of his state. The phrase ‘Cāṇakya's
kuṭilanīti’ (crooked tactics) has become proverbial.
Some scholars hold the opinion that he came to be
called ‘Kauṭilya’ because of his Kuṭila (crooked)
tactics; but evidence to establish this view-point is yet
to be adduced.
<div n="NI"/>It is his famous Arthaśāstra, which has made Cāṇakya's
name a world famous one. The great German thinker
Jolly has described the Arthaśāstra as a unique composi-
tion in the Sanskrit language. And, Johann Meyer, the
great western scholar has the following to say about
the book:—
<div n="NI"/>“Kauṭilya's Arthaśāstra is not one single text, it is a
collection and collateration of all books in ancient
India. To study the greatness of the theories and
principles contained in it today requires continuous and
constant study at least for twenty years and the un-
remitting efforts of a scholar with unabounded know-
ledge are required.”
[Page169-a+ 65]
Even his name has not yet been confirmed beyond
doubts. Kauṭilya is also called Viṣṇugupta, Cāṇakya,
Dramila, and Aṅgula. Modern researches place the
date of the Arthaśāstra at near about B.C. 400. In
Viśākhadatta's Mudrārāksasa (drama) the name
Kauṭilya is used.
<div n="NI"/>The Authors of Nītiśāstra maintain that the name of
the author of Arthaśāstra was Viṣṇugupta. It may be
gathered from the Mudrārākṣasa that he became famous
as Cāṇakya as he was the son of Caṇaka, and that
he possessed deep erudition in Nītiśāstra, Dharma-
śāstra and astrology. There is another legend to the
effect that this brahmin (Cāṇakya) belonged to Kāñcī-
pura and that he migrated to Pāṭalīputra, the seat of
learning and scholarship. As Kāmandaka, who lived
in the fourth century B.C. has eulogised Cāṇakya in
his nītiśāstra it may be surmised that Cāṇakya lived
sometime near about that. Candragupta and Cāṇakya
are referred to in the Viṣṇu and the Vāmana Purāṇas.
Kauṭilya was keen-eyed and scholar par excellence.
“Arthaśāstra” is a great book written by him after
thoroughly examining the viewpoints of previous
scholars, and then establishing his own views and
theories. From the Daśakumāracarita of Daṇḍī (A.D.
700) it may be seen that there are 6000 verses in the
Anuṣṭup metre (eight letters in one line) in the Artha-
śāstra composed by Viṣṇugupta for the use of Candra-
gupta Maurya. The Artha āstra has been held in praise
by Bāṇabhaṭṭa who lived in the 7th Century, Soma-
devasūri, who lived in the 10th century and also by
Hemacandra, the author of Kāvyānuśāsana, who lived
in the 12th century. The book is a discourse on the
principles and practices that are necessary to establish
a strong government of an ideal empire. Cāṇakya has
mentioned in his book with respect the old scholars like
Manu, Śukra, Bṛhaspati, Nārāyaṇa, Kātyāyana and
Govinda dīkṣita. (For the purāṇic story about Cāṇakya
see Vararuci, Para 6).
<LEND>
