<L>1428<pc>170-b<k1>चण्डिका<k2>चण्डिका
CAṆḌIKĀ¦. A terrific form of Pārvatī, who is worship-
ped in temples under the name Caṇḍikādevī. The
Devī's idol has twenty hands. In the hands on the right
side are held Śūla (three-pronged weapons) sword,
Vela (rod), Cakra, pāśa (rope), parigha (shield),
āyudha, abhaya, ḍamaru and Śakti, while the hands
on the left side hold nāgapāśa, small parigha, axe,
Aṅkuśa (a long-hooked rod), pāśa, maṇi, flag, gadā,
mirror and an iron cylindrical rod. There are also
idols of Caṇḍikā with ten hands. At the feet of the
Devī lies Mahiṣāsura with his head severed from body.
There will also be standing near the idol a puruṣa (man)
born from the neck of the Māhiṣa brandishing his wea-
pon, and with the Śūla in his hand in all rage and
vomiting blood and with red hairs and eyes. That
puruṣa is bound strongly on his neck with rope. The
vehicle of the Devī is a lion. The Devī is mounted on
the lion with her left leg on the asura lying below. This
Caṇḍikādevī thus stands with weapons in the hand, as
annihilator of enemies and with three eyes, and she
should be worshipped in pūjāmaṇḍala with nine Padmas
(tantric divisions) along with her idol. Firstly the Devī
should be worshipped in the central padma and Indra
and others in the other padmas.
<div n="NI"/>There is also another Caṇḍikādevī (Durgā) with eigh-
teen hands. She holds in her right hand a skull, shield,
mirror, broom, bow, flag, ḍamaru and pāśa (cord) and
in her left hand rod, iron pounder, Śūla, Vajra, sword,
Aṅkuśa (a sticklike weapon with one end bent to hold
on to things) Śara (arrow) Cakra and śalākā. There
are nine other Durgās having the same weapons as the
above except the Ḍamaru and the broom. But, they
have only sixteen hands each. These nine Durgās are
called Rudracaṇḍā, Pracaṇḍā, Ugracaṇḍā, Caṇḍā-
nāyikā, Aticaṇḍikā, and Caṇḍogrā. The Durgā standing
at the centre will have the colour of gorocana (red
sandal paste) and the others will have the following
colours; aruṇavarṇa (red) Kṛṣṇa varṇa (black), nīla
varṇa (blue), śukla varṇa (white), dhūmra varṇa
(brown) pīta varṇa (yellow) and śveṭa varṇa (white).
The nava Durgās (nine Durgās) are installed for the
prosperity of children etc. And all these are different
forms of Pārvatī.
<div n="NI"/>Also, in various aspects or poses, Pārvatī is called by
other names. She is called Siddhā when installed in
Raṃbhā-vana wearing akṣamālā (garland of beads),
kirīṭa (crown) and agni. The same Siddhā without
the fire is called Lalitā. Gaurīdevī with one of the
[Page171-a+ 65]
hands on the left side placed on the shoulder and the
head, and holding the mirror in the other hand, and
holding in one of the hands on the right side fruits etc.
and the other hand held up is called Saubhāgya gaurī.
(For further details see Pārvatī). (Agni Purāṇa, Chap-
ter 50).
<LEND>
