<L>1438<pc>172-b<k1>चन्द्रहास<k2>चन्द्रहास
CANDRAHĀSA¦. Son of King Sudhārmika of Kerala.
The following story about him is told in Jaimini Aśva-
medha Parva.
<div n="NI"/>Candrahāsa, born under the star Mūlam had a sixth
finger on the left foot indicative of poverty and of all
other evils. And, therefore, on his birth enemies killed
Sudhārmika and his wife followed him soon to the
other world. The child thus left an orphan was taken
to Kauṇḍalakapurī by a female inmate of the palace.
But unfortunately the woman died within three years
of the above incident. The child, just for very existence,
took to begging. After sometime some women jointly
took up charge of the boy. Once he went to the house
of Dhṛṣṭabuddhi, minister of Kauṇḍala where a feast
was in progress. The munis present there were impres-
sed by Candrahāsa and prophesied that he would be-
come a King. To Dhṛṣṭabuddhi, the munis said that the
child would guard his wealth. Angry and suspicious at
the prophesy of the munis Dhṛṣṭabuddhi asked his men
to kill the boy. They led him to the forest. On the
way Candrahāsa got a Śālagrāma (a small sacred stone
which represented some upadevatā) which he applied
very devotedly to his face. They did not in fact kill the
boy, but cut off his sixth finger on the left foot and
showed it to their master.
<div n="NI"/>Thus left alive in the forest by the murderers the
boy was roaming about when the King af Kalinda on
[Page173-a+ 65]
a hunting expedition saw the destitute boy, and taking
pity on him took him back with him to the palace.
The boy was put under the care of Medhāvatī, the
King's consort. The king named him Candrahāsa. Since
the King took a special interest in the education of
the child he became adept in all arts and sciences. At
the age of twelve Candrahāsa, with the permission of
the king, set out on a triumphal tour, and the king
welcomed Candrahāsa on his return after his glorious
victory that brought him wealth.
<div n="NI"/>At the instance of the Kalinda king, Candrahāsa, sent by
his messengers tribute to the Kauṇḍala king, who, under-
standing from them that so much of wealth had been
brought to the Kalinda king by Candrahāsa started at
once for the Kalinda palace. On being told the whole
story about Candrahāsa, Dhṛṣṭabuddhi, the minister of
the King of Kauṇḍala made up his mind to do away with
him somehow or other for which he despatched a letter
to his son, Madana, through Candrahāsa.
<div n="NI"/>Candrahāsa on his way to Kauṇḍala slept on the banks
of a river. Campakamālinī, the daughter of the King
of Kauṇḍala and Viṣayā, daughter of Dhṛṣṭabuddhi
happened to go to the river bank where Candrahāsa
was sleeping. Campakamālinī, who became subject to
great love for Candrahāsa removed the anklets on her
feet and approached him slowly, and when she took up
and read a letter she found lying beside him, she felt
awe and sorrow to find therein a suggestion to poison
him to death. Without wasting much time in thought she
changed the word ‘viṣamasmai’ (give him poison) to
‘Viṣayāsmai’ (give him Viṣayā) and put it in its former
place. After some time when Candrahāsa awoke from
sleep and reached Kauṇḍala city and delivered the letter
to Madana its content pleased him very much. As for
Viṣayā, she was spending her days in constant prayer
that Candrahāsa should marry her. In the cir-
cumstances the marriage of Candrahāsa and Viṣayā was
solemnised on the earliest auspicious day.
<div n="NI"/>In due course Dhṛṣṭabuddhi returned to Kauṇḍala with
all the wealth he could lay his hands upon after capturing
Kalinda. He seethed with grief and rage at the news
that Viṣayā had been married to Candrahāsa. All the
explanations offered by Madana did not satisfy him. He
persisted in his determination to kill Candrahāsa.
<div n="NI"/>The evil-minded Dhṛṣṭabuddhi one day asked Candra-
hāsa to go and worship at the Devī temple after having
made arrangements for his murder there. But, as fate
would have it, it was Madana who, instead of Candra-
hāsa, was killed. Even before the above incident had
happened the Kauṇdala King had married his daughter
Candramālinī to Candrahāsa, and after relinquishing
the kingdom also in his favour the King took to the forest
to lead a hermit's life.
<div n="NI"/>The above developments added fuel to the fire of anger
in respect of Dhṛṣṭabuddhi, and when he saw in the
temple precincts, his son's corpse he became well-nigh
mad. Crying out that all this was the result of his having
troubled the Vaiṣṇava Candrahāsa he dashed his head
against the pillars of the temple and died.
<div n="NI"/>Candrahāsa was grieved over the death of Dhṛṣṭabuddhi.
He worshipped Devī offering his flesh in the sacrificial
fire. Devī appeared and granted him two boons which
helped him to bring Dhṛṣṭabuddhi and Madana back to
life. And, when the Kalinda king and his wife, fearing the
wicked Dhṛṣṭabuddhi were about to end their lives in
[Page173-b+ 65]
flaming fire, Dhṛṣṭabuddhi went to them and imparted
to them the secrets about the life of Candrahāsa. The
Kalinda king and his wife dropped their former decision
to end their life, and Candrahāsa took up the reins of
government at the behest of the King. Candrahāsa,
who won repute as a very powerful and effective ruler,
during the Aśvamedha sacrifice of Yudhiṣṭhira captured
the sacrificial horse, and Arjuna, at the instance of
Kṛṣṇa had to enter into a pact with Candrahāsa, who
promised him help for the success of the sacrifice. Candra-
hāsa had a son called Makarākṣa by Viṣayā and another
son, Padmākṣa by Campakamālinī.
<LEND>
