<L>1446<pc>173-b<k1>चन्द्राङ्गद<k2>चन्द्राङ्गद
CANDRĀṄGADA¦. Grandson of Nala. He married
Sīmantinī, daughter of Citravarman, a king of Āryāvarta.
Sīmantinī, hearing about Candrāṅgada fell in love
with him, and it was with the help of Maitreyī, wife of
Yājñavalkya, that she was wedded to him.
<div n="NI"/>While once Candrāṅgada was enjoying a boat-race in
Kālindī (river) with his friends a storm upset the boat
and most of them were drowned to death. The servants
of Takṣaka saw Candrāṅgada sinking to the bottom
of the river and carried him to Pātāla and he stayed
there for sometime in the midst of amorous nāga damsels.
Candrāṅgada's people, under the impression that he
had died, performed his funeral rites, and Sīmantinī
[Page174-a+ 65]
took to widow's life. Enemies captured his kingdom
and imprisoned his father, Indrasena. When once the
nāga King asked Candrāṅgada to marry nāga girls and
settle down in Pātāla he told the King that he was already
married and that his wife Sīmantinī was brooding over
him, and he had, therefore, to return to her. Accordingly
the nāga king sent him back with presents of a white
horse, a Rākṣasa and an infant serpent.
<div n="NI"/>Candrāṅgada, with his presents, came up in Kālindī
where Sīmantinī, grief-stricken was spending her days
in penance, and they recognised each other. Informed
about the return of Candrāṅgada the enemy kings releas-
ed his father from captivity and apologised to him.
And he pardoned them.
<div n="NI"/>Candrāṅgada and Sīmantinī took great interest in observ-
ing somavāravrata (fasting etc. on Mondays) and pleased
at the vrata of the latter Śrī Pārvatī blessed her. Two
brahmins called Devamitra and Sārasvata were living
there at the time. Three sons called Sumedha, Sārasvata
and Sāmavān were born to Devamitra. The sons also
turned out to be great scholars but they were poor.
They could not get brides as they were poor. In the
hope that they would get some money if they approached
Candrāṅgada and Sīmantinī the brahmins went to
them. After hearing their story the king and his queen
conducted them in a procession in the precincts of the
palace, Sumedha dressed as husband and Sāmavān
as his wife. But, lo! when the procession was over
Sāmavān could not be divested of his womanhood, and
Sīmantinī named her Sāmavatī. Being told that his
son had turned woman Sārasvata sought the advice of
some munis to remedy the situation. But, all the attempts
of the munis to change the woman to man failed, and
they opined that only Pārvatī, who had been pleased
by the Somavāravrata, would be able to find a solution
to the problem. From that day onwards the brahmin
youths lived as husband and wife. (Śiva Purāṇa, Soma-
vāravratam).
<LEND>
