<L>1460<pc>175-a<k1>चन्द्रस्वामी<k2>चन्द्रस्वामी
CANDRASVĀMĪ¦. A brahmin, who got back his life by
worshipping Sūrya. He stayed with his wife, Devamatī
in Kamalapura ruled by King Kamalavarman. A son
called Mahīpāla was born to him, and at the time of the
birth of the child a celestial voice declared that Mahīpāla
would become King. A few years later a daughter called
Candramatī also was born to Candrasvāmī.
[Page175-b+ 65]
During this period, rains having failed, very severe
famine stalked Kamalapura. Even the king unmindful of
justice and righteousness began extracting from the
people whatever they possessed. Finding the situation
deteriorated so much Candrasvāmī set out for his father-
in-law's house with Mahīpāla and Candramatī, and on
the way they had to cross what was once a wild forest,
but which had by then been denuded of green trees or
other foliage due to the failure of the rains. The children
were severely afflicted by thirst, and so the father, after
leaving them at the foot of a tree went in search of water
when he was caught by the people of the forest king and
taken before him. When he knew that he was about to
be given in sacrifice to Devī the brahmin folded his
hands and prayed to Sūryadeva, who appeared before
him and assured him that not only will death not visit
him, but also he would be united with his wife and
children.
<div n="NI"/>The children left under the tree began crying, their
father having not returned to them, and a Vaiśya called
Sārthadhāra who came that way felt pity for the crying
children and took them to his house. One day
Anantasvāmī, a brahmin and a minister of King
Tārānātha of Tārāpura happened to visit Sārthadhāra.
Anantasvāmī, who had no children of his own took away
with him the children from Sārthadhāra.
<div n="NI"/>One day Sūryadeva appeared to the forest king in his
sleep and asked him not to kill the brahmin (Candra-
svāmi) held captive by him. The very next morning
Candrasvāmī was released from captivity. Roaming
about in quest of his children, Candrasvāmī reached the
city called Jalapura where he was put up as the guest
of a house-holder. One day the host told Candrasvāmī
that a vaiśya called Kanakavarman had, a few days back,
told him that he (Kanakavarman) had got two children,
one male and the other female from the forest, and taken
them to the Nālikera island. The very next day Candra-
svāmī, along with a vaiśya called Viṣṇuvarman arrived
at the Nālikera island, and on enquiry they were told
that Kanakavarman, with the children had left for
Kaṭāha island. They then went to Kaṭāha island only
to be told that Kanakavarman had gone to Karpūra
island. With another Vaiśya Candrasvāmi landed on the
Karpūra island to no purpose. After thus going to the
Suvarṇa and Siṃhala islands too Candrasvāmi met
Kanakavarman at Citrakūṭapura. Kanakavarman
showed the children to Candrasvāmi, but they were not
his. He burst into tears, and returned from Citrakūṭa-
pura. He passed on his way back many a temple and
city and at dusk reached a big forest. He satisfied his
hunger by eating some roots and fruits, and got upon
a tree and sat on the top of it. It was mid-night, yet
sleep did not oblige him. Then he saw a mātṛsaṅgha
(a group of women) consisting of Nārāyaṇī and others
come and dance at the foot of the tree. Nārāyaṇī saw
Candrasvāmī and after the dance was over and her
companions had left the place Nārāyaṇī called him down
from the tree and gave him a flower. And, according
to the advice of Nārāyaṇī the next day morning Candra-
svāmī went to Tārāpura where, accidentally he got into
the house of Anantasvāmī, minister of the kingdom, and,
for food, repeated vedic hymns. The minister invited him
for meals, and there he saw Mahīpāla and Candrāvatī.
He placed the flower presented by Nārāyaṇī on Mahī-
pāla's nose whereupon the children recognised him,
[Page176-a+ 65]
their father. The people celebrated it as a happy day.
King Tārāvarman gave his daughter, Vasumatī, in
marriage to Mahīpāla along with half his kingdom.
They went to Kamalapura and returned with their
mother. All of them spent their days very happily at
Tārāpura. (Kathāsaritsāgara, Alaṅkāravatī Laṃbaka,
Taraṅga 6).
<LEND>
