<L>1544<pc>183-a<k1>चिरायुस्<k2>चिरायुस्
CIRĀYUS¦. An ancient King of the country Cirāyu.
Nāgārjuna was a minister of this King. Nāgārjuna knew
the secret of ‘Rasāyanasiddhi’. Once Nāgārjuna pre-
pared a medicine for himself and the King which if
taken would keep them eternally young. They took
medicine accordingly.
<div n="NI"/>After some days a child of the minister died. Grief-
stricken Nāgārjuna decided to prepare Amṛta which
would eradicate death from this world. He had pre-
pared it but there remained one more medicine to be
added to this. The auspicious moment to add the same
was to come only after five days and Nāgārjuna waited.
The devas were frightened. If Amṛta was made avail-
able on earth men would become Devas. Devas could
not bear this and so they sent the Aśvinīkumāras to
the earth to persuade Nāgārjuna to desist from his work
of preparing Amṛta. Further they informed him that his
dead child was living happily in heaven. He agreed to
stop his work.
<div n="NI"/>After some time Cirāyus crowned his son Jīvahara as the
heir-apparent. Overjoyed Jīvahara ran to his mother
Dhanaparā to give her the glad tidings. Dhanaparā
told her son thus: “My child, why should you be so
happy to think that you have become the heir-apparent.
Several sons of your father had already become yuvarājas
and died before becoming King. Your father has taken
a medicine from Nāgārjuna and that will keep him
eternally young. None of his sons can aspire to be the
King. Your father is now eight hundred years old and
will live long. Many of you will become yuvarājas but
not the King. I will therefore suggest a way to tide over
this difficulty. Everyday in the afternoon Nāgārjuna
would come outside the palace and enquire whether
anybody is in need of anything. At that time he would
give whatever was asked for. It is an opportunity when
you can ask for his head. When Nāgārjuna is dead your
father would either die of grief or go to the forests.
Then you can become the King.”
<div n="NI"/>Jīvahara was pleased to hear this suggestion and he went
that after-noon to the palace of Nāgārjuna and when
Nāgārjuna as usual came out with his query Jīvahara
asked for his head. Most willingly Nāgārjuna offered
his head to be chopped off. But the effect of the medicine
made even the strongest cut by the sword ineffective.
Jīvahara lost many swords without Nāgārjuna getting
even a small scratch on his neck. The hubbub brought
the King to the scene and he immediately asked Nāgār-
juna to withdraw his head but Nāgārjuna refused saying,
“Oh, King, in my ninetynine previous births I have
offered my head like this and please do not ask me to
desist from making this offer for the hundredth time”.
[Page183-b+ 65]
So saying he embraced the King and taking a powder
from his body smeared it on the sword and asked Jīva-
hara to strike again. This time very easily Jīvahara
severed the head from the body of Nāgārjuna. The
King was greatly aggrieved and he renounced all and
went to the forest and led a pious life.
<div n="NI"/>Cirāyus' son Jīvahara became King. But Nāgārjuna's
sons killed him and his mother died of grief. (Taraṅga,
Ratnaprabhā Lambaka, Kathāsaritsāgara).
<LEND>
