<L>1630<pc>188-b<k1>चोल<k2>चोल
COLA¦. A very righteous emperor of Kāñcīpura. Be-
cause of the virtuous rule of this emperor his country
got the name Cola. There is an interesting story in
Padma Purāṇa of how the emperor attained Vaikuṇ-
ṭhaloka (The abode of Mahāviṣṇu).
<div n="NI"/>Once Cola went to Vaikuṇṭha to worship Mahāviṣṇu.
As he was worshipping him with pearls and flowers
of gold a brahmin subject of his came there to worship
him with water and Tulasī leaves. The simple offer-
ing of Tulasī leaves and flowers by this brahmaṛṣi, Viṣṇu-
dāsa, eclipsed the expensive one by the King and the
latter was greatly offended and he rebuked the Brahmin
saying that he was a poor man who did not know what
devotion to Viṣṇu was. But Viṣṇudāsa did not take
the taunt unchallenged. He asked the king to wait
and see who would merge with the glowing entity of
the Lord earlier.
<div n="NI"/>The King on returning to his palace started a Vaiṣṇava-
sattra. (An almonry dedicated to Mahāviṣṇu). This
almshouse was as comfortable and luxurious as the
one once started by Brahmā in the temple of Gaya.
Viṣṇudāsa on the other hand spent his life in a Viṣṇu
temple leading a celibate life and observing rites pleas-
ing to Viṣṇu.
<div n="NI"/>One day after finishing his daily morning rites Viṣṇu-
dāsa cooked his food as usual and kept it in its place
to be taken later. But on returning to it after some
time he found his food eaten by someone else. He
went without food that day and it happened the next
day also. It continued to happen thus for a week and
all these days Viṣṇudāsa went fasting. Viṣṇudāsa
then decided to watch and see who the thief was.
On keeping a vigil he found a Caṇḍāla (a harijan of
the lowest Cadre) timidly coming and grabbing at
the food with gluttonous greed to appease his hunger.
Seeing the famished skeletonous body of the thief Viṣṇu-
dāsa felt compassion rather than resentment and calling
him back to take the food went after him crying “Hi,
come here and take this ghee also with you. That food
has no fat in it.” But the Gaṇḍāla frightened at the
sight of the owner of the food ran away as fast as his
legs could carry him, Viṣṇudāsa following him. But
soon the Caṇḍāla fell fainting on the road exhausted and
tired. Viṣṇudāsa reaching his side started fanning him
with his cloth. Very soon the Caṇḍāla changed
himself into Mahāviṣṇu adorned with Śaṃkha, Cakra
and Gadā and Viṣṇu embracing his devotee took him
to Vaikuṇṭha.
<div n="NI"/>Hearing this Cola called Mudgala the priest of the
Vaiṣṇavasattra, to his side and lamented “I started
this sattra to spite Viṣṇudāsa and now he has gone to
[Page189-a+ 65]
Vaikuṇṭha. It was due to his true devotion to God
that he has attained salvation. What we have done
is of no use.” So saying he crowned his nephew as
King. Even while young he had become an ascetic and as
such had no sons. From that time the crowning of
the nephew as King became a precedent in Cola.
Renouncing the kingdom Cola went to the sacrificial
hall and circling the sacrificial fire stood before it and
addressing Mukunda said “Oh Viṣṇu, grant me un-
wavering devotion to you in thought, speech and deed.”
Repeating this three times the king jumped into the
fire. At this Mudgala, the priest, burst into anger and
tore off the lock of hair on his head. So even today
the descendants of Mudgala do not have hair-locks.
Viṣṇu who is always affectionate to his devotees graci-
ously appeared from the sacrificial fire and embraced
the King. The King was then taken to Vaikuṇṭha.
(Chapters 110, 111, Padma Purāṇa).
<LEND>
