<L>1671<pc>194-b<k1>दक्षिणा<k2>दक्षिणा
DAKṢIṆĀ¦. A daughter, born to Prajāpati Ruci, by his
wife Ākūti. The first Manu was Svāyambhuva, the son
of Brahmā. He accepted Śatarūpā, his sister who be-
came sinless by penance, as his wife. Śatarūpā gave birth
to two sons Priyavrata and Uttānapāda, and two
daughters, Prasūti and Ākūti. Of these two daughters,
Prasūtī was given to Prajāpati Dakṣa and Ākūti to
Prajāpati Ruci. Ākūti gave birth to twins, a son named
Yajña and a daughter named Dakṣiṇā. To Yajña
twelve sons were born by Dakṣiṇā. They were a class
of devas (gods) called the Yāmas in the regime of Manu
Svāyambhuva (Viṣṇu Purāṇa, Aṃśa 1, Chapter 7).
Now Dakṣiṇā is worshipped as a goddess. The same
Dakṣiṇā was reborn in the Goloka under the name
Suśīlā. At that time she was a cowherd woman and
friend of Rādhā. She liked to talk with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One
day Rādhā saw her sitting in the lap of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
engaged in sexual sports, in a secluded place. When
Suśīlā saw that Rādhā had found them out, she be-
came dumbfounded with shame, and sat with bowed
head. Śrī Kṛṣṇa slowly placed Suśīlā devi down and
instantly vanished. The angry Rādhā cursed Suśīlā to
become ashes if ever she entered the Goloka again. Then
Rādhā ran about everywhere in search of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
but he could not be found.
<div n="NI"/>Immediately after the curse, Suśīlā got down from the
Goloka and began to worship Mahālakṣmī with devotion
and meditation and very severe fast and vow. After
a long time Mahālakṣmī appeared to her and blessed
her, and Suśīlā became absorbed in Mahālakṣmī.
Since the absorption of Suśīlā devī, who was the rebirth
of Dakṣiṇādevī, in Mahālakṣmī, the sacrifice of the
devas (gods) became fruitless. They were much grieved.
They all went to Brahmā to find a solution. As the matter
was serious Brahmā meditated upon Viṣṇu, who
[Page195-a+ 65]
became pleased with Brahmā and to save the devas, he
attracted Dakṣiṇādevī from the body of Mahālakṣmī
and gave her as a present to Brahmā. Brahmā gave that
devī (goddess) to Yajñapuruṣa (the god of sacrifice)
so that the sacrifices of gods might become fruitful.
When Yajñapuruṣa saw that supernatural beauty he was
overpowered by lust and swooned. The couple spent a
hundred divine years in seclusion enjoying the company
of each other, as a result of which devī became pregnant.
The pregnancy matured in twelve divine years and she
gave birth to a child which was named Phalada. It is
this same Phalada, the son of Yajñapuruṣa and Dakṣiṇā
who awards fruits to all actions. The learned men say
that Yajñapuruṣa, Dakṣiṇādevī and Phalada divide the
fruits of actions among the doers. (Devī Bhāgavata,
Skandha 9).
<LEND>
