<L>1714<pc>200-a<k1>दण्ड<k2>दण्ड
DAṆḌA¦ VI (DAṆḌAKA). A thief who had made the
world tremble in the Dvāpara yuga. This wicked Daṇḍ-
aka used to steal the wealth of the Brāhmaṇas, kill
those who trusted him, speak lies, rape the women of
others, drink liquor, eat the flesh of cows, mingle with
wicked people and do various other sinful deeds daily.
Daṇḍa once went to a Vaiṣṇavite temple to commit
robbery. When he reached the steps of the temple he
wiped his legs which were wet, on the ground and a
small depression that was there, was levelled by the
[Page200-b+ 65]
drawing of his legs. He broke the lock with an iron rod
and entered the temple. Inside the temple he saw Kṛṣṇa,
clad in yellow robes lying on a beautiful cot, with his
spouse Rādhā. The thief instantly bowed before the
spouse of Rādhā. By this act his sins were washed away.
Still impelled by his evil nature, he took the silk garment
of Kṛṣṇa, spread it on the ground, collected as many
things as he could take, placed them in the garment and
making them into a bundle, got out of the temple
with shaky feet. The bundle fell on the ground with a
loud noise. Hearing the noise the neighbours woke up
and looked out. The thief began to run and was bitten
by a poisonous snake and fell down dead. The men of
Yama (God of death) tied the spirit of the thief with a
rope and took him before Yama. Citragupta looked
into his accounts and informed Yama that he had
committed all the sins. Yama asked if there was any
good deed to his account. Then Citragupta said “When
this great sinner was going to commit theft in a Vaiṣṇa-
vite temple, at the steps of the temple, he levelled a pit
by the mud on his leg, and that single good deed on
his part has wiped out all his sins.” Hearing this Yama
gave him a golden seat and showed hospitality and then
bowed before him and said “By the soil on your legs you
have purified my abode today. I am grateful to you.
Now you may go to the blissful world of Viṣṇu where
there are no deaths or births or sorrow”. Hearing this
Daṇḍa entered Vaikuṇṭha. (Padma Purāṇa, Chapter 1).
<LEND>
