<L>1729<pc>201-a<k1>दण्डनीति<k2>दण्डनीति
DAṆḌANĪTI¦. (The laws of chastisement). Daṇḍa-
nīti is the law of punishment given to the subjects
by Kings of ancient India. According to the criminal
laws of ancient India, fining a man upto two hundred
and fifty paṇas (a coin) was called Prathama Śāhasa
daṇḍa (first degree of punishment) and fining up to
five hundred paṇas was called Madhyama Sāhasa
[Page201-b+ 65]
daṇḍa (medium punishment) and fining upto thou-
sand paṇas was called Uttama Sāhasa daṇḍa (highest
degree of punishment). If a man complains to
the King that his property is stolen, when actually
it is not stolen, the man will be fined the amount
that is said to have been stolen. There was another
law, that the owner of the stolen property and
the thief would have to pay double the amount
they admit, if the amount shown in the complaint
differed from the actual amount stolen. For appear-
ing as false witness, the three classes of non-Brahmins
were punished with fine and if he was a Brahmin he
would have to be cast out of the society. The King
ordered that if one spent the property entrusted with
him for keeping, the owner of the property would
have to be paid double the amount. If one says that
he has given the property for keeping when actually
it is not, the person will have to be punished as if he
were a thief. If a man spends an amount without
knowing that it was the property of others, the man
will have to be acquitted of the charge.
<div n="NI"/>If an artisan has received money in advance for a parti-
cular product and fails to give the thing at the stipu-
lated time the King will fine the artisan one svarṇa.
If a man received money in advance on a promise to
do a particular work and if he fails to do the work he
will be fined one Kṛṣṇala of gold. (One Kṛṣṇala
weighs three yava grains). If a man conceals his diseases
and marries a damsel, she will be considered as a spins-
ter and the man will be fined two hundred paṇas.
If a cowherd agrees to look after the cows of another
receiving pay and food and refuses to return the cow
to the owner the King will fine him hundred paṇas.
If a Kṣatriya scoffed a Brāhmaṇa the fine imposed
would be hundred paṇas. If it is a Vaiśya the fine will
be two hundred paṇas. If it is a Śūdra he will be put
to death. If a Brahmin scoffs a Kṣatriya the fine is
fifty paṇas. If a Śūdra scoffs a Vaiśya the fine is twenty-
five paṇas. If a Brahmin scoffs a Śūdra the fine is
only twelve paṇas. If a Śūdra scoffs a Kṣatriya his
tongue should be cut off. If a Śūdra advises a Brahmin,
he may inflict any punishment on the Śūdra.
<div n="NI"/>If a Śūdra wronged a Brahmin, the Śūdra might be
punished by cutting off the organ which was employed
in the crime. If one spat at a Brahmin, the two lips of
the culprit might be cut off. If a man passed urine on a
Brahmin the culprit would have his penis cut off. If
a Śūdra sits on the seats of the upper classes his but-
tock will have to be cut off. If one slays cow, elephant,
camel or horse half of his limbs will have to be cut
off. Cutting across a road, changing of boundaries,
making the water of pools and ponds impure etc. will
have to be punished with a fine of two suvarṇas. (Agni
Purāṇa, Chapter 227).
<div n="NI"/>DAṆḌAPĀṆI I. A king of the family of Yayāti.
This King was the son of Vibhīnara and the father
of Nimi. (Bhāgavata, Skandha 10).
<div n="NI"/>DAṆḌAPĀṆI II. The son of Pauṇḍraka, the King
of Kāśi. Śrī Kṛṣṇa killed Pauṇḍraka. As his son
Daṇḍapāṇi was not powerful enough to kill Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
he performed the sacrifice of Maheśvara yajña. Being
pleased at the sacrifice Śiva created Kṛtyā in the
sacrificial fire and sent her to Dvārakā to destroy Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who aimed his Sudarśana cakra (wheel-weapon)
at her. She ran to Vārāṇasī, where the wheel turned
[Page202-a+ 65]
Kṛtyā and everybody with her to ashes. (Padma-
Purāṇa, Uttara Kāṇḍa, Chapter 278).
<LEND>
