<L>1804<pc>208-b<k1>देवदत्त<k2>देवदत्त<h>II
DEVADATTA II¦. A king of ancient India, son of King
Jayadatta. Jayadatta wanted to marry his son Devadatta
to the daughter of a Vaiśya in Pāṭalīputra. Though it
[Page209-a+ 65]
was a far cry from Pāṭalīputra to Jayadatta's court the
Vaiśya married his daughter to the prince as he attached
much importance to such an alliance with the King.
From the dowry given by the Vaiśya to his daughter
the resources of her father appeared to be very meagre
to Devadatta.
<div n="NI"/>After some time Devadatta's wife returned to her house
with the permission of her husband. During her absence
Jayadatta expired, enemies attacked his kingdom and
Devadatta with his mother ran away from his kingdom.
Sometime after that he started for his wife's house. But,
feeling that it would not be proper for him to personally
tell his father-in-law about what had happened to him
he waited outside an inn near his wife's house, and he
had not waited there for long when he saw a woman
descending by a cord from the other door of the house.
He felt deeply mortified to detect that it was his wife
who was thus descending. And, when she, not recognis-
ing Devadatta in his dirty clothes, asked him who he
was, he answered a ‘traveller’. Taking no notice of this
‘traveller’ she got into the inn, and Devadatta followed
her. Inside the inn she was met by a man who beat her
for being late to go to him; but, in spite of the beating
she pleased him with coy words. Then and there Deva-
datta divorced her in his mind, but remained there
observing their love-making. In the course of their love-
play an ear-ring studded with costly gems rolled down
the floor from her ears, but she did not notice it. She
parted from her paramour before dawn. Devadatta
went to Kānyakubja with the ear-ring, and there he
pledged it for one lakh sovereigns with which money he
collected an army and conquered back his lost kingdom.
Then he redeemed the pledge and sent the ear-ring to
his father-in-law. The whole incident became public.
When she realised the fact that the stranger whom she
had met at the inn was her own husband, Devadatta's
wife felt so deeply hurt and humiliated that her heart was
broken and she died. (Kathāsaritsāgara, Naravāhana-
datta Janana, Taraṅga 1).
<LEND>
