<L>1845<pc>211-a<k1>देवप्रतिष्ठा<k2>देवप्रतिष्ठा
DEVAPRATIṢṬHĀ¦. The sacred rite of installation of
Devas (idols) in temples for which definite rules have
been laid down by great ācāryas. According to the
rules Vāsudevamūrti is to be installed in the centre of
the pañcāyatanas. (the Śrī kovil—the sanctum sancto-
rium and the four paths used for the procession of the
deity, around it). The mūrtis Vāmana, Narasiṃha,
Hayagrīva and Varāha are to be installed in the zones
[Page211-b+ 66]
(corners) dominated by Agni, Nirṛti, Vāyu and Īśāna
respectively. Nārāyaṇamūrti should be installed at the
centre of the prāsāda. Ambikā should be installed in
Agni's corner, Āditya in Nirṛti's corner, Brahmā in Vāyu's
corner and Śivaliṅga in the Īśāna corner. Liṅga in the
form of Rudra should also be installed in the Īśāna
corner; or it may be installed in all the nine corners or
zones. In that case Vāsudevamūrti should be installed at
the centre. All the Devas bearing the name Rāma
must be installed to the east of the Prāsāda. Lokapāla-
kas like Indra should be installed at the eight places
starting with the east. In Pañcāyatana pratiṣṭhā Puru-
ṣottama should be installed at the centre. Mahālakṣmī
and Vaiśravaṇa are to be installed to the east of the
Prāsāda, and the Mātṛs in the south. Subrahmaṇya,
Gaṇapati, Īśāna and the planets (grahaṣ) like Sun
should be installed in the west. Daśāvatāramūrtis (ten
incarnations of Viṣṇu) should be installed in the North.
Caṇḍikā should be installed in Agni's zone, Sarasvatī
in Vāyu's zone, Ambīkā in Nirṛti's zone and Śrī Bhaga-
vatī in Īśāna zone. In temples with thirteen Ālayas
Viṣṇu should be installed at the centre. Mūrtis like
Keśava should be in the east.
<div n="NI"/>Devapratimās (idols) are of seven varieties like those
made of earth, of wood, of metals, of gems, of sandal
wood, of stone and of flowers. Of the above, idols made
of earth, sandalwood and of flowers are meant only for
temporary use, but they also grant all the desires of the
devotees.
<div n="NI"/>Stone for idols should be got from mountains. Pāṇḍura
(white), Aruṇa (red), Pīta (yellow) and Kṛṣṇa (black)-
rocks having any one of these four colours may be
selected. If no such stone is available any other stone
may be used, but by doing homa and reciting Narasiṃha
mantra the attributes of any of the specified varṇas
should be transferred to it. It is best to have white
markings on the stone selected for the idol. There are
the three genders, masculine, feminine and neuter with
reference to stones. Stone which produces the sound of
bell metal on being hit and gives out sparks of fire on
being cut is of the masculine gender. Stone which
possesses these attributes to a lesser degree is of the
feminine gender. Stone with no shape is of neuter gen-
der. Beside these three varieties there are the sagarbha
(pregnant) stones also, viz. stones with round markings
on them, and they should not be used for making idols.
Once it is decided to make an idol, Vanayajña should
be performed first. To worship the forest from which
the stone for the idol was to be obtained is vanayajña.
A specified place in the forest should be dug up, the
pit treated with cow-dung and a small platform raised
and Viṣṇu worshipped thereon. After sacrificial offerings
etc. instruments for the construction of the idol like
ṭaṅka (chisel) should be worshipped. To sprinkle on
the stone śālitoya (water in which paddy grains are
put) purified with the chanting of astramantra is the
next step. After that bhūtabali (offerings to the spirits
of the stone) should be performed upon which the
bhūtas residing inside the stone will quit. Then the
ācārya should go to sleep repeating the svapna mantra.
<F>1. {%Svapnamantra:%}
<Poem>Oṃ namaḥ sakalalokāya Viṣṇave prabhaviṣṇave /
Viśvāya viśvarūpāya svapnādhipataye namaḥ //
Ācakṣva devadeveśa prasuptosmi tavāntikam /
Svapne sarvāni kāryāṇi hṛdistāni tu yāni me //
Om Om hum phaṭ viṣṇave svāhā.</Poem></F>
[Page212-a+ 65]
If he dreams good dreams everything is quite right;
if bad dreams are dreamt, the next morning narasiṃha-
homa should be performed, the stone given offerings
with chanting of astramantra. The edge of the instru-
ments used for sculpturing the idol should be firstly
smeared with ghee, honey etc. The architect should be
one who has gained mastery over the senses. He should
first cut the stone into a square, and then it should be
placed on a chariot, covered with cloth and taken to
his house. Then after performing a pūjā the work on
the idol should be started. (Agni Purāṇa, Chapter 43).
<LEND>
