<L>1867<pc>213-b<k1>देवस्मिता<k2>देवस्मिता
DEVASMITĀ¦. A Gem of a woman who was much devoted
to her husband. The story of Devasmitā has been so
often quoted in ancient Indian literature. She was the
daughter of a Vaiśya called Dharmagupta and was
married to Guhasena, son of a Vaiśya called Dhana-
datta, who belonged to Tāmraliptinagara.
<div n="NI"/>After the death of his father Guhasena decided to go to
Kaṭāhadvīpa for trade, and Devasmitā, a very suspici-
ous wife, objected to it. When his other relations began
pressing him to go to the dvīpa for trade and his wife
not to go, Guhasena could not take a decision on the
[Page214-a+ 65]
matter. He began a penance so that God might take
the decision in the matter. Devasmitā also followed
him. Then God appeared to them in their dreams
and gave each of them a red lotus flower saying, “both
of you keep one flower each with you, and while both
of you are away from each other if either of you go
astray the lotus flower in the hands of the other
person will fade.” And, on awaking both of them had
a flower in their hands. Guhasena with his flower in
his hands started for Kaṭāhadvīpa, and Devasmitā sta-
yed at home with her eyes fixed on her lotus flower.
Guhasena reached the dvīpa and traded in gems. Every-
body was surprised to find in his hands a lotus flower
which never faded. Four Vaiśya youngsters wanted to
understand the secret of it and one day they invited
Guhasena to their house and treated him to liquor very
liberally. When he got absolutely drunk they question-
ed him about the secret of the lotus flower, and he,
though in indistinct words, explained it to them. When
the secret was thus out all the four youngsters decided
to seduce his wife. They extracted from him the infor-
mation that he was not returning in the near future,
and they then came to Tāmralipti.
<div n="NI"/>At that time there lived in Tāmralipti a bogus Sannyā-
sinī (a female anchorite) called Yogakaraṇḍikā. The four
youths from Kaṭāhadvīpa visited her, and she under-
took to fulfil their desire. She asked them to halt at her
house and then went to Devasmitā with some refreshments.
Devasmitā's bitch barked very violently at the bogus an-
chorite when she told the former thus:—“Child! don't
you see the bitch barking at my very sight. The bitch is
crying thinking of her previous birth at my sight. Her-
self (the bitch) and I were, in our last birth, the wives
of a Brahmin. Since our husband was a courtier at the
palace often he was away from home and in his absence
I used to satisfy the cravings of sex by associating freely
with other males. I had even at that time realised the
truth that there was no duty higher than satisfying the
senses, and so I am now reborn with memories of the
past life. As for this bitch in her past life as co-wife with
me of the Brahmin, she sinned against her sense-organs
by upholding, in ignorance, her chastity, as a punish-
ment for which she was born as dog in this life. Yet, she
remembers her past.
<div n="NI"/>Though Devasmitā saw through the false and trea-
cherous heart of the bogus anchorite, without expres-
sing it she talked in all respect with her. Believing that
she had succeeded in her mission she told Devasmitā
about the four youths who had come from Kaṭāha-
dvīpa, and Devasmitā welcomed the idea very gladly.
<div n="NI"/>Devasmitā got some liquor and mixed poison in it.
When it was night one of the Vaiśya youths came, and
after rendering him unconscious by administering the
poisoned liquor to him Devasmitā stripped him of all
his clothes and ornaments, got him scratched on the
brows by the bitch and threw him into a cow dung
heap. Before it was dawn next day he returned to the
anchorite's house, took a bath and dressed himself up in
decent clothings. His other three companions also visi-
ted Devasmitā one after the other in the next three
days, and they too underwent the same experience as the
first one. Lastly the bogus sannyāsinī also was got down
and Devasmitā cut her limbs and sent her away. And,
after this Devasmitā put on the garb of a merchant and
went to Kaṭāhadvīpa and identified her husband from
[Page214-b+ 65]
among a thousand merchants. Guhasena too felt his
own doubts about her identity. But, without revealing
her identity she saw the king and told him that she had
certain matters to submit before the prajāpariṣat (popu-
lar assembly). The King accordingly convened a session
of the assembly and Devasmitā identified the four youths
who had tried to seduce her and submitted all details
regarding the episode. The King then gave her a lot of
money, appointed the four youths as her servants and
sent her back home with Guhasena. (Kathāsaritsāgara,
Kathāmukhalaṃbakam, Taraṅga 5).
<LEND>
