<L>1910<pc>221-a<k1>धनेश्वर<k2>धनेश्वर
DHANEŚVARA¦. A Brahmin born in the city of Avanti.
Abandoning the duties enjoined by scriptures to a
Brahmin he strayed away from the Brahmin fold doing
all sorts of sins. He became a store-house of sins. He
was engaged in commerce and once while travelling he
reached the city of Māhiṣmatī. There he met many people
from several adjoining villages who had come there to ob-
serve the Kārttika Vrata. Later Dhaneśvara was bitten by
a cobra there and fell down fainting. Very soon he died.
<div n="NI"/>When he died the messengers of Yama came
and took him bound to Kālapurī. There, Citra-
gupta read out to Yama all the sins Dhaneśvara had
committed from boyhood till his death. Citragupta
added “Even from boyhood there is no record of any
good deed done by him. On the other hand the sins he
has committed could not be told in a year. He is an
incarnation of evil. He must be roasted in hell till the
end of the world.” On hearing this the body of Yama
blazed like flame with anger and calling aside an atten-
dant he ordered, “Hi, Pretapālaka, take this sinner
away, beat him with spiked clubs and throw him into
Kumbhīpāka”. Pretapālaka instantly took him away
and breaking his head with a thorn-spiked club threw
[Page221-b+ 64]
him into a copper vessel containing burning oil. But to
his great amazement the burning oil became cold as
soon as the body of Dhaneśvara came into contact with
it just as it happened once before in the case of Prahlāda.
The perplexed attendant ran to Yama and told him of
this strange incident. Yama was also surprised at this
novelty in hell and called back Dhaneśvara and started
enquiring about his life once again. Nārada came there
at that time. Both of them then talked about Dhaneśvara.
Nārada told Yama how the unanticipated thing so
happened because Dhaneśvara on the eve of his death
spent some time with people who were observing the
Kārttika Vrata washing away thus all the sins accumu-
lated so far in his life. Hearing that Yama took Dhaneś-
vara round hell and giving Dhaneśvara, the position of
a Yakṣa sent him to Kuberapurī. (Chapter 115, Padma
Purāṇa).
<LEND>
