<L>1965<pc>232-a<k1>धर्मव्याध<k2>धर्मव्याध
DHARMAVYĀDHA¦. Though he was born in the caste
of foresters he became a saint by following the path of
duty and righteousness. In his previous birth he was a
Brahmin. He was a friend of a king who was an adept
in archery. Once both went on hunting expedition to the
forest. The brahmin sent an arrow at a wild animal but
the arrow went and struck a sage who was doing
penance under a tree. When the sage was rolling on the
arrow he said: “Oh, evil-natured Brāhmaṇa, may you
be born as a hunter selling flesh in your next life.” The
Brahmin went and apologised to the sage and craved
for pardon. Taking pity on him the sage consoled him
by saying that though he would be born as such, he
would be a great scholar and attain mokṣa by doing his
duty without even once wavering from it.
<div n="NI"/>The Brahmin was born a hunter in the country of
Mithilā He took to looking after his parents as a vow
and soon became a top-ranking righteous man. He did
his duty to which he was born. He sold meat and
earned a living. He never killed or butchered an animal.
One day a Brahmin named Kauśika was doing penance
sitting under a tree when a crane perched on the top
of its branches defiled the Brahmin's head with its
droppings. The Brahmin in rage looked up and his
powerful stare burnt the crane and it fell down dead.
Leaving that place some time later he went to a house
to beg. The house-wife informed him that he would be
given alms only after attending to her husband. The
Brahmin was not pleased with her reply. Seeing that she
added “Please do not look at me like that. I am no
crane. To me my husband is supreme.”
<div n="NI"/>The Brahmin was taken aback when he heard the lady
mention the incident of the crane. The lady explained
to him that all her powers were due to her devotion to
her husband and advised the Brahmin to go and meet
Dharmavyādha of Mithilā to remove the egoism in him.
Obeying her instructions Kauśika went and accepted
Dharmavyādha as his guru. The learned hunter then
spoke to Kauśika about Varṇadharmas, Śiṣṭācāras,
hiṃsā and ahiṃsā, Mīmāṃsā relating to dharma and
karma, the importance and glory of Brahmavidyā, the
significance of the control of the senses, Triguṇas, Prāṇa-
vāyu, service to father and mother and many such
other things. The egoism of Kauśika was removed and
he returned home. Devoted to his parents he attained
heaven. (Chapters 27 to 33, Vana Parva).
<LEND>
