<L>2022<pc>239-a<k1>ध्रुवसन्धि<k2>ध्रुवसन्धि
DHRUVASANDHI¦. A king of Kosala. During the reign
of this King there was prosperity in Ayodhyā and the
people were virtuous. This king had two wives
Manoramā and Līlāvatī. A son named Sudarśana was
born to Manoramā. After a month the second wife
also gave birth to a son named Śatrujit. The King was
much pleased and both sons were brought up alike.
As Śatrujit was cleverer than Sudarśana people loved
Śatrujit more.
<div n="NI"/>Once Dhruvasandhi went to the forest for hunt-
ing and was killed by a lion in the forest. Accord-
ing to the custom Sudarśana became King. Līlā-
vatī, the mother of Śatrujit was the daughter of the
King of Ujjayinī. Her desire was to make Śatrujit the
King. Manoramā. the mother of Sudarśana was the
daughter of the King of Kaliṅga. Hearing about the
death of Dhruvasandhi, the kings of Ujjayinī and
Kaliṅga arrived at Ayodhyā. The King of Ujjayinī
got angry because Sudarśana was made king and
began war. The King of Kaliṅga took the side of
Sudarśana. A terrible battle was fought in Ayodhyā
as to who should be the heir to the throne. In the
battle Yudhājit, the King of Ujjayinī, killed Vīrasena,
the king of Kaliṅga. Sudarśana and his mother
Manoramā were in a sorry plight. According to the
advice of minister Vidulla, Manoramā and Sudarśana
fled from the capital. Vidulla and the maid of
Manoramā accompanied them. In two days they
reached Gaṅgātaṭa. They were caught by fishermen
thieves and they lost everything they had. At last with
the help of a boat they crossed the Ganges and reached
Trikūṭa. They went to the hermitage of Bharadvāja
[Page239-b+ 64]
who was doing penance there. He gave them protec-
tion.
<div n="NI"/>After making Śatrujjit King, Yudhājit began to search
for Manoramā and Sudarśana. He got news that they
lived in Citrakūṭa. Yudhājit went there with an army.
But he could not get them out of the hermitage of
Bharadvāja. Manoramā and Sudarśana lived safely in
the hermitage.
<div n="NI"/>Once Vidulla came to the hermitage of Bharadvāja to
enquire about Manoramā. Seeing the old man the
hermit boys called out “Klība Klība.” Prince Sudarśana
heard only “Klī”. The syllable ‘Klī’ is the spell called
‘Kāmarāja bījamantra’. Without knowing its meaning
Sudarśana called out ‘Klī’ several times. With that the
prince got a special power.
<div n="NI"/>Six more years passed. The prince became eleven years
old. By this time Bharadvāja had taught the prince
Vedas, Śāśtras, etc. The prince was a devotee of Devī.
Devī appeared before him and gave him a bow and a
quiver which would never become empty, and an
impenetrable armour. Sudarśana married Śaśikalā the
daughter of the King of Kāśī. Niṣāda, the King of
Śṛṅgiverapura, was a friend of Dhruvasandhi. He gave
Sudarśana a chariot which Sudarśana rode through the
forest. With the help of the King of Kāśī and others
Sudarśana recaptured Ayodhyā. He made Vidulla his
minister and ruled over the country for a long time.
(Devī Bhāgavata, Skandha 3).
<LEND>
