<L>2107<pc>246-b<k1>द्राविड<k2>द्राविड
DRĀVIḌA¦ BHĀṢĀ. (Dravidian Language). Linguists
have classified the languages of the world under certain
groups. Important among them are the Indo-European
group, the Semitic group, the Hamitic group, the Ural
Altaic group, the South East Asiatic group, the Dravi-
dian group, Austric group, the Bantu group and the
Chinese group.
<div n="NI"/>Almost all the languages in South India belong to the
Dravidian group. The languages of this group are
Tamil, Telugu, Kannaḍa, Malayālam, Tulu, Kuṭaku,
Toṭa, Koṭa, Baḍaka, Kuruk and Brāhūī. Of these
Brāhūī alone is used in the mountain regions of Balu-
cisthan. Linguists like Smīmud and others have stated
that there is a close relation between the Australian and
Dravidian languages. The Āryan language has influence-
ed the Dravidian languages to a great extent. But Tamil
has not been so much influenced as Telugu, Kannaḍa
and Malayālam. It is because Tamil had a great wealth
of literature of its own from ancient times.
The Dravidian group is again divided into four sections:
Eastern, Western, Northern and Southern. Brāhūī
is the only language in the Northern section. Its Ety-
[Page247-a+ 64]
mology, grammar etc. are like that of the Dravidian
group. But it had been influenced to a large extent by
the Iranian language. Still it keeps its Dravidian cha-
racter.
<div n="NI"/>Telugu, Goṇḍi, Kuruk, Kolāmi, Mālṭa etc. come under
the Eastern group. Of these only Telugu has grown as
a literary language. Telugu is in use from Madras to
Mahendragiri. But it has various sub-divisions and local
differences. The Telugu used in the Districts of Kṛṣṇā
and Godāvarī is considered to be the purest form.
Golari, Sālevāri, Kāmāri, Vāsari, Dāsari etc. are its local
sub-divisions. Over modern Telugu, Sanskrit has its
full sway.
<div n="NI"/>Kannaḍa, Kuṭaku, Toṭa, Koḍa, etc. come under the
western group. Kannaḍa is used in Mysore and the
vicinity of the Districts of Coimbatore, Salem, Bellary,
Anantapore etc. Baḍaka used in the Nilgiris, Kurumpa,
used in the vicinity of Nilgiris, Kuṭaku used in
Coorg, are the sub divisions of Kannaḍa. In edicts from
the 5th century Kannaḍa could be seen in its ancient
form. The modern Kannaḍa has been used from 16th
century onwards. Tulu is in use in places between the
rivers Candragiri in the south of. Southern Canara and
Kalyāṇapurī. Only a few ancient songs could be includ-
ed in Tulu literature. The Malayālam script is used
to write Tulu. But now certain books in Tulu have
been published using Kannaḍa script.
<div n="NI"/>Tamil and Malayālam are the languages of the Sou-
thern section. The oldest literature in the Dravidian
group is in Tamil. The most ancient form of Tamil
is seen in the edicts and stone tables of the 30th century
B.C. The most important among them are the Saṅga
works. The grammatical work ‘Tolkāppiyam, is the
literary grammar of Centamil. Malayālam became an
independent language only by the 8th century A.D. The
close relation that exists between Tamil and Malayālam
is not visible in any other language of the Dravidian
group. By examining the inter-relations of the various
languages in the Dravidian group, and noting
how close or distant the relation is, we can ascertain
which languages separated themselves first from the
original Dravida language.
<LEND>
