<L>2168<pc>254-b<k1>दुर्गम<k2>दुर्गम
DURGAMA¦. An asura chief born in the dynasty of
Hiraṇyākṣa and son of Taru, Durgama was an enemy
of the Devas from his very birth. He argued to him-
self thus: “the very strength and power of the
Devas depend on the Vedas; if there is no Veda there is
no yajña, if there is no yajña the Devas do not get
their share of the havis, if they do not get the havis
they will lose all their strength and prowess, and, there-
fore, the best means to teach the Devas a lesson is to
destroy the Vedas.” Durgama decided that the surest
means to achieve that was to perform penance. Accor-
dingly he went to the Himālayas and began doing
penance abstaining from food and drink. After a thou-
sand years Brahmā appeared to him and asked him
what boon he wanted. Durgama said “I must get the
Vedas; I should get all the mantras known to brahmins
and Devas in the three worlds, and all the presiding
deities of those mantras should come and stand before
me and be subject to my control; I must also get the
strength to defeat all the Devas.” Brahmā granted
Durgama all the boons. And, thenceforth the brahmins
could not recollect the Vedas or the mantras. No
bathing, no homas, no daily rites, no rites for the dead,
no yajñas, no japa (repeating divine names) and no
tapas. Symptoms of old age caught the Devas in its
grips. Durgama drove them out of Devaloka and they
hid in mountain caves. Within a hundred years the
world reached the rock bottom of destruction. Water
disappeared from the world. Alarmed beyond measure
at these developments the brahmins went to the Himāl-
ayas and prayed to Jagadambikā (mother of the uni-
verse). Ambikā appeared to them, and their lamenta-
tions brought tears to the eyes of Ambikā, and thus
water scarcity came to an end. Ambikā gave them Śāka
(a vegetable) fruits and roots to eat. Because she pro-
tected her devotees by supplying Śāka to them she
came to be known as Śākambharī, thenceforward. Also
[Page255-a+ 65]
because she shed tears from her eyes, thenceforth she
came to be addressed as Śatākṣī also.
<div n="NI"/>Being told about the above developments Durgama,
with his army attacked Devī. The fight became fierce
and furious. From Devī's body emerged numerous
Śaktis fully armed. Dhāriṇī, Bālā, Tripurā, Bhairavī
and Kālī with 10,000 hands were some of the promi-
nent and powerful Śaktis which thus emerged. The
army of Durgama was annihilated. Then the fight
commenced directly between Devī and Durgama.
Fifteen arrows of Devī hit the asura at the very same
time and he was killed. (Devī Bhāgavata, Saptama
Skandha).
<LEND>
