<L>2262<pc>267-b<k1>एकादशी<k2>एकादशी
EKĀDAŚĪ¦. The eleventh day after a new moon or full
moon day. The vrata observed on this day is called
the Ekādaśī vrata. King Ambarīṣa observed very
strictly and continuously the Ekādaśī Vrata to obtain
the status of Indra. (See under Ambarīṣa). (Navama
Skandha, Bhāgavata). This vrata would fetch food
for the hungry and salvation for those who are in
search of it. (Agni Purāṇa). The method of observing
this vrata is detailed below:
<div n="NI"/>Those who observe the Ekādaśī vrata should be on a
regulated diet excluding meat and avoid sexual acts
on the Daśamī day, the day preceding Ekādaśī. On
both the Ekādaśī days in a month one should not take
any food at all. The period which combines Ekādaśī
with Dvādaśī (the twelfth day) is called Harivāsara
because of the presence of Viṣṇu at that time. That
is a good time for doing sacred yajñas. That day where
there is only a small portion of Ekādaśī and the rest
Dvādasī is the best day for yajñas. Trayodaśī (the
thirteenth day) is good for breaking the fast. The day
which merges Dvādaśī into Trayodaśī is the best day
for breaking the fast. Do not observe the Vrata on a
day which combines Daśamī with Ekādaśī. Hell is the
result if one does so.
<div n="NI"/>Completely abstaining from food on the Ekādaśī day
you should take food on the Dvādaśī day. As you take
your food you should pray like this: “Bhuṅkṣyehaṃ
Puṇḍarīkākṣa śaraṇaṃ me bhavācyuta”. (Oh, Puṇḍa-
rīkākṣa, I am going to break my fast. Oh, Bhagavan,
let you be my heaven). If an Ekādaśī comes on a
Pūyaṃ—Puṣya—day in the bright half of the month that
day should on any account be observed. That day would
give the observer unlimited good result and that
Ekādaśī is qualified as Pāpanāśinī (destroyer of all
evils). When Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī happen to combine
on a Tiruvoṇam (Śrāvaṇa) day the Ekādaśī is qualified
as Vijayā. That day gives prosperity to devotees. It is
also called Vijayā if an Ekādaśī comes in the month
of Phālguna (March) on a Pūyaṃ (Puṣya) day. The
wise extol this day as one promising crores of good effects.
On the Ekādaśī day you should do Viṣṇu Pūjā which
is productive of universal happiness. He who does so
will acquire children and wealth in this world and
attain Viṣṇuloka on death. (Chapter 178, Agni
Purāṇa)
<LEND>
