<L>2349<pc>279-a<k1>गर्भ<k2>गर्भ
GARBHA¦(M). The Purāṇas have described the views
of sages about the origin of ātman in woman's womb.
Asitamahāmuni stated the following about the birth of
[Page279-b+ 63]
a child to King Janaka. (Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa. Chapter
<div n="NI"/>48). Of the seven elements in the human body, viz.,
Rasa, Rakta (blood), Māṃsa (flesh), Medas (fat),
Asthi (bone), Majjā (marrow) and Śukla (seminal
fluid) the last one, Śukla, is the most valuable. Brahma-
bīja (the seed for production) is contained in Śukla.
From the food we consume, blood and the seminal fluid
take their nutrition. The Śukla emitted during coitus
enters the womb of the woman propelled as it were by
Kroṣṭavāyu. It takes only one night for the Śukla to
get inextricably mixed with blood in the womb. In that
mixing if the proportion of blood is higher, the child
born will be girl, and if the proportion of Śukla is high-
er, the offspring will be boy. If blood and Śukla are
mixed exactly in equal proportions the child will be
‘neutral’, neither girl nor boy. During the first month
of pregnancy the child will be in liquid form. In the
second, it solidifies due to the mixing and interplay of
heat, cold, air, etc. During the third, holes for
eye, ear, etc. become ready and the vein system is
formed. In the fourth, head, hands and legs of the
child are formed, and it is during this period that the
prospective mother develops certain desires. If those
desires are not satisfied the child may be born with
physical deformities. During the fifth month the hips
and bones develop. The various organs get firmer and
stronger gradually and fingers appear during the sixth
month. It is during the sixth month that hairs on the
head and body appear and feelings and emotions ori-
ginate in the mind. During the seventh month the ten
vāyus (winds) on the basis of the nervous system are
released, and the child experiences glimpses of its pre-
vious existence, and ability to feel pain also is there.
During the ninth month due to the force of the wind
which effects actual delivery the child gets head down
in the womb, and during the tenth month it emerges
out of the womb. The child loses its memory about the
past because of its contact with the female organ
and external wind.
<div n="NI"/>According to the Agni Purāṇa the process is a little
different:
<div n="NI"/>When Jīva (the soul) has entered the womb for rebirth
it remains in fluid form during the first month. During
the second month it solidifies; in the third month the
organs begin to develop, in the fourth month skin,
flesh and bones appear, in the fifth month hairs appear,
in the sixth month mind is produced, in the seventh
month the child will begin to feel pain. The body is
covered by a skin (Garbhacarma) and both hands are
held above the head in saluting position. If the child
is a female it lies in the left side of the mother's womb,
if a male on the right and if ‘neutral’ in the middle of
it. From the seventh month the child begins to experi-
ence the taste of foods consumed by the mother. During
the eighth and ninth month there would be great
emotional excitements and upsurges. If the mother
suffered from chronic diseases the child also would in-
herit it. When pregnancy is matured thus, certain
winds lead the child down the womb and it gets out
through the female organ.
<div n="NI"/>The child inherits its skin, flesh and heart from the
mother. The sex organ, marrow, excretion, sweet and
belly are inherited from the father. Head, the nervous
[Page280-a+ 64]
system and śukla are the contributions of the ātman.
(Agni Purāṇa, Chapter 369).
<LEND>
