<L>2404<pc>288-a<k1>गयातीर्थ<k2>गयातीर्थ
GAYĀTĪRTHA¦. The following story is told in the Agni
Purāṇa about the origin of this very reputed sacred
place at Gayā.
<div n="NI"/>An asura called Gaya was once performing
tapas here. As the intensity of his tapas went
on increasing, the Devas got nervous and they
approached Viṣṇu with the request that he should
save them from Gayāsura. Viṣṇu agreed to oblige
them. Meantime the intensity of Gaya's tapas increa-
sed daily. Ultimately Viṣṇu appeared to Gaya and as
requested by him granted him the boon to the effect
that he would become more holy and sanctified than
all the tīrthas in the world.
<div n="NI"/>Brahmā and other Devas became afraid of Gaya's
power and prowess and they complained about him to
Viṣṇu, who advised Brahmā to request Gaya for his
body in order to perform a yajña. Brahmā did so and
Gaya lay down on earth so that the Yajña might be
performed on his body. Brahmā began the yajña on his
head, and made an offering when the body of Gaya
was not stationary or quiet. When told about this fact
Viṣṇu called up Dharmadeva (See Marīci, Para 3) and
told him thus: “You please hold devaśilā (a divine
stone) on the body of Gaya, and let all the Devas sit
upon it, and I shall be seated on the stone along with
the Devas, holding the gadā (club) in my hands.”
<div n="NI"/>Dharmadeva did as he was bidden by Viṣṇu. The body
of Gaya stopped shaking as soon as Viṣṇu sat upon the
stone, and Brahmā made the full offerings. Thenceforth
the place became a holy tirtha under the name Gayā.
After the yajña was over Brahmā gave the Gaya temple
20,000 yards (5 Krośa) in extent with 55 villages
attached to it as dakṣiṇā (fee) to the masters of the
ceremony. Brahmā presented the villages to them after
creating therein hills purely of gold, rivers flowing
with milk and honey, houses built of Gold and silver
etc. But the brahmins who got these gifts stayed on
there, their avarice only on the increase perhaps.
Angry at this Brahmā cursed the people of Gayā, and
according to it the brahmins became illiterate and evil-
minded; rivers flowed with water instead of milk and
honey. The brahmins lamenting over their evil fate
submitted their grievances before Brahmā, who consol-
ed them thus: Well, brahmins of Gayā, as long as
there exist the sun and the moon you will continue
to be dependent upon the Gayā tīrtha for your sus-
tenance. Whoever comes to Gayā and gives offerings
to you and performs the due rites for the souls of the
departed, the souls of hundred generations of his
ancestors will be transferred from hell to heaven where
they will attain final beatitude.”
<div n="NI"/>Thus did Gayātīrtha become famous. (Agni Purāṇa,
Chapter 144).
<LEND>
