<L>2505<pc>299-a<k1>ग्रामदेवता<k2>ग्रामदेवता
GRĀMADEVATĀ¦. India is predominantly a rural
country with a number of villages, and the rural folk
depend mainly upon agriculture for living. Agricultural
land, rain and epidemics which affect them as well as
their cattle—these are the main concern of the villagers.
Indians, from very ancient days, used to believe that
each of the above has its own presiding devatās. Such
devatās are the grāmadevatās.
<div n="NI"/>Devī is the chief grāmadevatā of South India. Devī is
called Durgā and Kālī also. But, Devī is worshipped in
sixtyfour different forms or aspects. The gentle Devī,
viz. in her gentle aspect or attitude has three forms,
Kanyā, Kāmākṣī, and Mūkāmbikā. In Kerala Devī is
called Bhagavatī also. Valiyaṅgāḍi Bhagavatī of
Calicut is Lakṣmīdevī. Kālī temples in Karṇāṭaka are
called ‘Koṭṭāpuraṃ Lakṣmī Kṣetras’. There are such
[Page299-b+ 64]
temples in Andhra also. Most of them are Jokulāmbikā
temples. In Tamil Nadu there are grāmadevatās called
Mariyamma, Kālīyamma, and Draupadīyamma. Not
the Draupadī mentioned in the Mahābhārata; but the
Kaṇṇakī of Cilappadikāra is the Devī worshipped in
Tamil Nadu.
<div n="NI"/>There are two kinds of Devīs called Saptamātṛs and
Saptakanyās. Saptamātṛs have puruṣas (husbands) and
saptakanyās have seven brothers for help and support.
Devī pūjā is very much prevalent in South India. The
custom is supposed to be as old as 5000 B.C. Idols of
Devī have been unearthed from Mohanjo-daro and
Harappa. Even the Buddhists worship the Devīs called
Yakṣī and Hārītī. When in after years Hinduism was
revitalised these grāmadevatās got promoted as the
great Devatās of the epics and the Purāṇas. The
Rāmāyaṇa mentions the incident of the Devī called
Laṅkālakṣmī driving away Hanūmān. There are famous
Kālī temples in Ujjayinī and Calcutta. It is believed
that in the temple at Cidambaram also Kālī occupied
a prominent place. But, according to legends, Śiva
defeated Kālī in a dance competition and ousted her to
her present temple at the outskirts of the city. Cāmuṇḍī
is worshipped as the ancestral guardian deity in Mysore.
The Kāmākṣī temple of Kāñcī, Mīnākṣī temple of
Madura and Mūkāmbikā temple of North Karṇāṭaka
may be cited as examples for the worship of the gentle
form of Devī. Alarmel Maṅkattāyār temple at
Tiruccānūr is a very important Devī temple. The
‘Aditi’ in the Vedas and Koṭṭravai of Tamil Saṅgha
texts point to the very long past of the Devī in India.
Kālidāsa and Kālamegha (a Tamil poet of the
fifteenth century have worshipped Kālī. Śrī Rāmakṛṣṇa
Paramahaṃsa and the great modern Tamil poet
Bhāratī were devotees of Kālī.
<div n="NI"/>There are also grāmadevas worshipped like the grāma-
devatās. Munīśvara and Karuppan are two prominent
grāmadevas. In certain villages Bhairava, Vīra Irula,
Kāṭṭeri and Noṅgi are worshipped as grāmadevas. In
South Karṇāṭaka a set of Devas called Bhūtas are
worshipped, Pañcuruli being one of them. Śāstā or
Ayyappa is another grāmadeva. Śāstā is most popular
in Kerala and in Tamil Nāḍu. Buddha also is called
Śāstā. In certain places idols of Śāstā with two wives,
called Pūrṇā and Puṣkalā are also found. Śabarimala
Śāstā is yogamūrti (in yogic pose).
<div n="NI"/>In most of the grāmadeva temples idols of the Devas
are not found. A pīṭha (stool-like seat) is supposed as
the seat of the Deva and it represents the Deva also.
But, in some temples weapons like the sword, the club
etc. are found. Offerings to the deity in grāmakṣetras
and annual festivals are common in such temples. (Nām
vaṇamguṃ daivaṃgal-Tamil).
<LEND>
