<L>2515<pc>300-b<k1>गृहस्थ<k2>गृहस्थ
GṚHASTHA¦. In ancient India the life of a male person
was divided into four stages, namely, Brahmacarya
Gārhasthya, Vānaprastha and Sannyāsa. He who is in
the second stage of life is called a Gṛhastha.
<div n="NI"/>When a person marries, he becomes a Gṛhastha. The
bride should have certain qualities to be an ideal wife.
The girl should be only a third of the age of the male.
She should not have hair either too much or too little.
She should not be black or of a piṅgala hue. She
should not have any of her organs extra at the time of
birth. The following types of girls are to be avoided
for marriage. (1) Girls bred up by low-caste people
(2) girls with hair over the body (3) not born of a
good family (4) sick ones (5) ill-natured ones (6) girls
who use abusive language (7) with hereditary diseases
(8) with śmaśru (hair on the face) (9) girls with mascu-
line features (10) with the sound of males (11) lean
ones (12) with the voice of a crow (13) with thick eye-
lashes (14) round eyes. Again avoid girls having hair
on their legs, raised heels and those with small depre-
ssions on their cheeks when they laugh. Girls whose
bodies are too bright, with white nails, red eyes and
fat hands and legs are not good for marriage. Girls too
tall or too short, with eyelashes touching each other,
with broad and raised teeth are to be avoided. A true
Gṛhastha is one who marries a girl who is separated
from him by five generations on the maternal side and
seven generations on the paternal side.
<div n="NI"/>A true Gṛhastha should daily worship devas, cows,
brahmins, scholars, old men and preceptors. He should
worship sandhyā (dawn and dusk) daily and also fire.
He should wear on his body leaves of Viṣṇukrānti,
Karuka (couch grass), Tulasī (holy basil plant). He
should appear neat and smart wearing good dress, with
white flowers on his well combed head. He should
never steal, speak unpleasant words to anybody nor
speak an untruth even if it be pleasant. He should not
openly speak about the sins of others. He should not
covet another man's wife. He should not travel in a
damaged vehicle nor should he sit under the shade of
a tree on the banks of a river. A Gṛhastha should not
mingle with such persons as (1) men hated by the
people (2) outcastes from society (3) insane men (4)
those having a great number of enemies (5) those who
torment others (6) prostitutes (7) husbands of prosti-
tutes (8) those who use abusive language (9) those
who tell lies (10) spendthrifts (11) scandalmongers and
(12) rogues. Never travel alone. He should not bathe
against the flow in a river. Never enter a house on fire
nor climb to the extreme top of trees. He should not
grind his teeth, squeeze out his nose, yawn without
covering the mouth. breathe or spit, with the face
covered, laugh noisily, breathe out with a sound, bite
[Page301-a+ 63]
the teeth, pinch grasses or write or draw on the ground
(Aṃśa 3, Viṣṇu Purāṇa).
<LEND>
