<L>2529<pc>301-b<k1>गुणाढ्य<k2>गुणाढ्य
GUṆĀḌHYA¦. He is the author of the celebrated Bṛhat-
kathā which is a precious mine of Sanskrit Literature.
Guṇāḍhya had written this in satanic (paiśācika) lan-
guage difficult for ordinary people to read or understand.
This was translated into Sanskrit by the poet Kṣemen-
dra in a book called Bṛhatkathāmañjarī. This was the
first translation and it was in an abridged form. Soma-
deva made a more elaborate translation and it is this
translation that is now known as the Kathāsaritsāgara.
<div n="NI"/>Guṇāḍhya is believed to be an incarnation of the Śiva-
pārṣada, Mālyavān. There is a story behind Mālyavān
being cursed and made to be born as man by Pārvatī.
Once Pārvatī worried Śiva to tell her a story original
and interesting and not heard of by anybody before.
Placing Nandikeśa at the door and instructing him not
to allow anybody inside Śiva started narrating the story
of the Vidyādharas to Pārvatī. At that time Puṣpadanta,
chief of the genie-guards of Śiva who was at liberty
to go to the presence of Śiva at any time, came there
and heedless of the protests of Nandikeśa entered the
room. There he found Śiva telling a story to Pārvatī
and she was hearing the same with rapt attention. The
story was so interesting that Puṣpadanta also heard it
standing concealed in a place in the room. After having
heard the whole story Puṣpadanta went back unnoticed
[Page302-a+ 65]
and told the story to his wife, Jayā. Jayā on another
occasion told the story to Pārvatī and the latter was
taken aback and she went to Śiva and complained:
“Your Lordship told me that the story was unique,
not heard of before by anybody. But even Jayā knows
it.” And she wept with disappointment. Then Śiva
stood in meditation for sometime, and knew how
Puṣpadanta had entered the room unnoticed and how
he had told the story he had heard to Jayā. Śiva
explained this to Pārvatī and she immediately sent
word for Puṣpadanta who came trembling and confess-
ed everything. Pārvatī then cursed Puṣpadanta
and also Mālyavān who came to speak on behalf of
Puṣpadanta and made them men. They begged for
relief from the curse and then she said, “Long ago
Vaiśravaṇa cursed a Yakṣa named Supratīka and con-
verted him into a devil named Kāṇabhūti. This devil
is now living in the deep forests on the Vindhya moun-
tains. When you talk with him you will become your
old selves again. Puṣpadanta should first tell the story
he has heard from Śiva to Kāṇabhūti and then he will
be relieved from the curse. Kāṇabhūti will then tell
Mālyavān many stories. Then Kāṇabhūti will get
release from the curse. Mālyavān should make public
all the stories he had heard from Kāṇabhūti and then
he will also get release from the curse.” Accordingly
Puṣpadanta was born as Vararuci in the city of Kau-
śāṃbī and Mālyavān as Guṇāḍhya in the city of
Supratiṣṭhita. (For details see under Vararuci).
<div n="NI"/>The story of how Supratīka became Kāṇabhūti is this:
The Yakṣa, Supratīka, got friendly with a demon
named Śūlaśiras and they moved about freely as chums.
Vaiśravaṇa did not like this and he cursed Supratīka
and converted him into a satan. At once, Dīrghajaṅgha,
elder brother of Supratīka, came and begged for relief.
Vaiśravaṇa then said: “Puṣpadanta will be born on
the earth by a curse as man and he will one day come
and tell Supratīka many great stories. After hearing
them he should narrate them to Mālyavān who will
then be born on the earth as man. Supratīka will then
get release from the curse and become his old self again”.
Supratīka was born in the forests of Vindhya as
Kāṇabhūti.
<div n="NI"/>This is the story of the birth of Guṇāḍhya. There is a
city called Supratiṣṭhita in the country of Pratiṣṭhāna
and there lived a brahmin named Somaśarmā. He had
two sons, Vatsa and Gulmaka and a daughter named
Śrutārthā. Before long the parents died and Śrutārthā
grew up under the protection of her brothers. Kīrtisena,
brother of Vāsuki, married her by gāndharva rites and
Guṇāḍhya was the child born to them.
<div n="NI"/>Even while he was a boy he went to the south for his
education and there from a brahmin he studied all arts
and sciences. When he completed his studies he started
on a tour and at that time became the minister of a
king called Sātavāhana. He married from there. One
day his (Sātavāhana's) wife rebuked the king when the
latter made some linguistic errors and Sātavāhana be-
came dejected and moody from that day onwards. Then
there came to the court of the King a brahmin named
Śarvavarman who promised to make the King proficient
in languages within six months. But Guṇāḍhya said that
it was not possible to do so within six months. They made
a bet. Guṇāḍhya swore that if Śarvavarman would teach
the King the Śabdasāstra (science of language-sounds)
[Page302-b+ 65]
within six months he (Guṇāḍhya) would abandon his
knowledge of Sanskrit, Prakrit and local language. On the
other hand if Śarvavarmā failed to accomplish the feat
the latter should wear on his head for twelve years the
chappals of Guṇāḍhya. Śarvavarman agreed and went
to do penance to please Subrahmaṇya. Subrahmaṇya
granted him a boon by the power of which Śarvavar-
man made Sātavāhana a scholar in Sanskrit. Defeated,
Guṇāḍhya abandoned his knowledge of all languages
and bidding adieu to the King by gestures left for the
Vindhyan forests.
<div n="NI"/>When Guṇāḍhya went to the forests Kāṇabhūti, King
of the satans was not in his place. He heard the
satans speaking in their peculiar language and intelli-
gent that he was he picked up the language,
and when Kāṇabhūti came he spoke to him in his own
language. Kāṇabhūti told in the satanic language the
great stories of seven Vidyādharas. Guṇāḍhya took
seven years to write the stories in the satanic language
and compile them into seven lakhs of granthas to form
a Mahākāvya. There were no writing materials availa-
ble for him and Guṇāḍhya wrote them all on leaves
using blood and twigs. When he started reading his
book all the devas assembled in the sky to hear it. On
hearing it Kāṇabhūti got release from the curse. It is
this book containing seven lakhs of granthas that is
called the Bṛhatkathā.
<div n="NI"/>Guṇāḍhya then thought of how to keep alive such an
interesting and gigantic book and then two of his
companions Guṇadeva and Nandideva suggested to
him to dedicate the book to the King, Sātavāhana.
Guṇāḍhya agreed to that and the two disciples took the
book to the King. The King read the whole story. But
did not like it. It was very elaborate. The language
was satanic. It was written with blood. The King
looked at the book with contempt.
<div n="NI"/>When the disciples found that the King was not in
favour of the work, they took it back to Guṇādhya.
Guṇāḍhya felt a great dejection. He went to a hillock
nearby with his disciples and made a big fire-pit. He set
aside the story of the Vidyādhara named Naravāhana-
datta composed of a lakh of granthas for the use of
his disciples and then started putting into the fire-pit
the rest, reading aloud each leaf before he put it into
the fire. The sad disciples watched it weeping. Even
the wild animals of the forest flocked to the place and
stood there listening to Guṇāḍhya. At that time Sāta-
vāhana became a sick man. The physicians of the
palace said that the illness was caused by the dry flesh
he was taking. The cook was called in and he accus-
ed the hunters who supplied them with flesh
daily. The hunters were questioned and they informed
the King that only such flesh was available since all
the beasts and birds were standing without food listen-
ing to a man who was reading something from a leaf
and then burning it in a fire-pit before him. Sātavā-
hana immediately went to the place guided by the
hunters. There to his astonishment he found Guṇāḍhya
sitting before a fire-pit surrounded by weeping beasts
and birds and throwing leaves of his book one by one
into the fire after reading each before it was put into
the fire. Sātavāhana ran to him and prostrated before
him. Guṇāḍhya then told Sātavāhana his story in
satanic language beginning from the curse on Puṣpa-
danta down to his destroying his own work in the fire.
[Page303-a+ 63]
His disciples translated his talk to the King. The King
was awe-strickeṅ and he asked for the granthas. But
by that time he had already burnt six lakhs of gran-
thas containing six stories. He gave to the King the
remaining one lakh of granthas. After that, bidding
farewell to the King, Guṇāḍhya jumped into the fire
and abandoned his life on earth and went to the
presence of Śiva.
<div n="NI"/>King Sātavāhana accompanied by the disciples of
Guṅāḍhya came to his palace carrying the ‘Bṛhatkathā’
containing the story of Naravāhanadatta. He gave
presents to Guṇadeva and Nandideva who explained
to him the book in Sanskrit. King Sātavāhana added
a preface to the book to explain to the public how the
book came to be written in satanic language. The book
very soon got world fame. (Pīṭhānulaṃbaka Kathā-
sarit sāgara).
<LEND>
