<L>2533<pc>304-a<k1>गुणवरा<k2>गुणवरा
GUṆAVARĀ¦. A heroine, devoted to her husband, in
the ancient literature of India. There is a story in
Kathāsaritsāgara describing the depth of her devotion
to her husband.
<div n="NI"/>Guṇavarā was the queen of Vīrabhuja, King of the
country of Vardhamāna. He had besides Guṇavarā
ninetynine other wives. But none had any children. So,
the King asked the chief physician of the state to
suggest a way to remedy this. The physician asked for
a white and horned goat to be brought and he then
made with its flesh a preparation. Then sprinkling
over it a special medicinal dust, he gave it to the wives
to eat. But Guṇavarā who never left her husband for
a moment came late to take the preparation and by the
time she came the others had already consumed the whole
lot. Then by an order of the King the horns of the
goat were made into a similar preparation and
Guṇavarā took it with the dust sprinkled over it. All
the wives got a child each. Guṇavarā's son was named
Śṛṅgabhuja.
<div n="NI"/>All the other wives of Vīrabhuja became jealous of
Guṇavarā. They told the King that Guṇavarā was in
love with a servant of the palace. The King did not
believe it. But he thought he would test her. The King
called the servant in question and accusing him of
having committed the murder of a brahmin sent him
away from the state on a pilgrimage. Sorrow-stricken
the servant set out for the pilgrimage. The King then
approached Guṇavarā and said that a sannyāsin had
declared that he, the King, would lose his crown if one
of his wives was not put in a cell underground.
Guṇavarā who adored her husband readily agreed to
live underground.
<div n="NI"/>The other wives were satisfied and yet they wanted to
send away her son, Śṛṅgabhuja also from the palace.
One day when all the children were playing in the
court-yard a stork came and sat perched on the top of
the palace. The princes attempted to catch hold of it.
A sannyāsin who came there then informed the children
that the stork was none other than Agniśikha, a demon,
who had come there to capture and take away the
children. All the children then tried to drop it down
by arrows. But none succeeded. Then Śṛṅgabhuja took
a golden arrow from the palace and sent it against the
bird. The arrow struck the demon but the bird flew
away carrying the golden arrow.
<div n="NI"/>The other princes found it as an opportunity to rebuke
Śṛṅgabhuja and they, led by Nirvāsabhuja, reproached
him for losing the golden arrow. Unable to bear their
insult Śṛṅgabhuja went after the stork following the
path of the blood drops which fell on the ground from
the wound. At last he reached Dhūmapura, the land of
Agniśikha. There he fell in love with Rūpaśikhā, the
daughter of Agniśikha. They were soon married and
yet Agniśikha gave Śṛṅgabhuja great trouble. At last
Śṛṅgabhuja and Rūpaśikhā took the golden arrow and
eloped from the place one night and reached the city of
Vardhamāna. Agniśikha followed them but the magic
powers of Rūpaśikhā made him turn back. When King
Vīrabhuja saw his son Śṛṅgabhuja he was extremely
happy. The King then released Guṇavarā from the
dungeon and praised her for her devotion to her hus-
band. He loved her more and treated her with greater
[Page304-b+ 63]
affection than before. At that time the servant who had
been sent away also returned. (Taraṅga 5, Ratnapra-
bhālaṃbaka, Kathāsaritsāgara).
<LEND>
