<L>2812<pc>336-a<k1>जाग्रत्<k2>जाग्रत्
JĀGRAT¦. According to the vision of Ṛṣis or sages, every
living being has four states. They are Jāgrat (waking
state), Svapna (dream), Suṣupti (profound sleep) and
Turīya (the fourth state of the soul, i.e. oneness with
Brahman in different degrees). The hermits and sages
have said about the four states of soul as given below:—
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Jāgrat.%} In this state the individual soul is awake.
The five organs of senses, the five organs of activity and
the four inner organs of the living being will be active,
when the soul is awake. In this state he enjoys the outer
world through the five senses. That is, he sees with the
eyes, hears with the ears, tastes with tongue, smells with
the nose and feels with the skin. Every man thinks that
his understanding through the senses is real. It is the
individual soul which is responsible for this understand-
ing. But it is difficult to say whether these perceptions
through the senses are real or unreal. A hermit says as
follows:—“An individual soul travels from Jāgrat to
Svapna and from Svapna to Jāgrat as a fish which goes
from one shore to the other without touching anything.
For an individual soul the state of jāgrat is only one of
the four states. So we cannot give the verdict that
the state of Jāgrat alone is real and all the rest are
unreal.” The individual soul which is in the state of
Jāgrat enjoys the outer world and so it is ‘bahiḥ-
prajña’ (external—knowing). In this state the indi-
vidual soul enjoys the external world with the seven
organs and the nineteen faces. The seven organs are,
the two eyes, head, soul, body, urinal bladder and the
legs. The nineteen faces are the five senses, the five
organs of activity, the five life-breaths and the four
inner organs of mind, intellect, egoism and will. The
individual soul in the state of Jāgrat enjoys the external
world with these organs and faces. The soul in this state
is called ‘Vaiśvānara’. This state is experienced by all
the human beings of the world and so it is called Vaiś-
vānaras
<F>1) (a) Tadyathā mahāmatsyasya ubhe kūle anusaṃcaratah
Pūrvaṃ cāparaṃ caivaṃ evāyaṃ puruṣaḥ etāvubhāvantau
anusaṃcarati svapnāntaṃ buddhāntaṃ ca. (Bṛhadāraṇya-
ka).
<div n="NI"/>(b) Jāgaritasthāno bahihprajñaḥ saptāṅgaḥ ekonaviṃśati-
mukhaḥ sthūlabhukvaiśvānaraḥ. (Māṇḍūkyopaniṣad)</F> (Bṛhadāraṇyaka, Māṇḍūkyopaniṣad).
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Svapna (dream).%} The second state of the individual
soul, is svapna (dream). He who indulges in dream,
forgets everything he had experienced in the state of
Jāgrat and creating new worlds he enjoys them. While
the five organs of senses and the five organs of activity
of the dreamer take rest, the four inner organs of
citta (will) Ahaṅkāra (egoism) Buddhi (reason) and
manas (Mind) will be working. See what the author of
Upaniṣad says. “The dreamer separates his self from the
wide universe and creates his own radiance by his own
radiance. The light of the self is the light for the
dreamer. That man creates a chariot or an assemblage
of chariots or roads where there is no chariot or an
assemblage of chariots or a road; joy, delight or ex-
treme delight where there is no joy or delight or ex-
[Page336-b+ 75]
treme delight; ponds, wells and rivers where there are
no ponds, wells and rivers. A dreamer is a Lord; the
state of the dream is the state of activity.” Another
hermit says as follows about the state of dream:—
“The dreaming individual soul which sees again things
which were seen here and there, hears again things
which were heard here and there, enjoys again things
which were enjoyed in places far and near, is really
enjoying greatness. He sees things seen and not seen,
heard and not heard enjoyed and not enjoyed. The
dreamer, like a King who travels with his train through-
out his country, as he pleases, plays by getting in and
out of his own body, and enjoys lofty experiences, and
so he is happier than he who eats alone and enjoys his
food. The individual soul in its state of dream is called
the Taijasa (the radiant) because he illuminates
himself by his own radiance. In this state the individual
soul does not touch anything and so it is sinless.
<F>2) (a) Sa yatra prasvapityasya lokasya sarvato mātrāmupādāya
svayaṃ vihatya svayaṃ nirmāya svena bhāsā svena jyotiṣā prasva-
pityatrāyaṃ puruṣaḥ svayaṃ jyotirbhavati (Bṛhadāraṇyaka).
(b) Atraiva devaḥ svapnamahimānam anubhavati yad
dṛṣṭaṃ dṛṣṭam anupaśyati śrutaṃ śrutamevārtham
anuśṛṇoti. Daśadigantaraiśca pratyanubhūtaṃ punaḥ
punaḥ pratyanubhavati, dṛṣṭaṃ cādṛṣṭam cāśrutaṃ ca
śrutaṃ cānubhūtaṃ ca ananubhūtaṃ ca saccāsacca
sarvaṃ paśyati sarvaṃ paśyati. (Praśnopaniṣad).
(c) Sa yathā mahārājo jānapadād gṛhītvā sve janapade yathā-
kāmaṃ parivartate, evamevaiṣa etat prāṇān gṛhītvā
sve śarīre yathākāmaṃ parivartate (Bṛhadāraṇyaka).</F>
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Suṣupti.%} The third state of the individual soul is
suṣupti (profound sleep). The soul alone is active in
this state. In suṣupti the individual soul desires for
nothing and does not indulge in dream. In this state
the individual soul does not think that the soul and the
body are two. So it is unitary. The sleeper is called
‘Prājña’ also. The individual soul which is in the state
of sleep, completely severs its connection with the
organs of senses, the organs of action, mind, the
Prāṇamayakośa (the chest of the life-breaths), the
manomaya kośa (the cask of mind) and Vijñānamaya
Kośa, the chest of knowledge or understanding. The mind,
the sense organs, Sūkṣmaśarīra (the subtle body) and
the actions are the items which could abandon the
connection with jīvātmā (individual soul). In sleep
the jīvātmā separating all its connections, for the time
being, with these items absorbs itself in the Brahman.
See what the author of the Upaniṣad says about the
state of Suṣupti (Sleep).
<F>3 (a) Yatra svapno na kaṃcana kāmaṃ kāmayate na kañcana
svapnaṃ paśyati tat suṣuptaṃ suṣuptasthāne ekībhūtaḥ
prajñānaghanam eva ānaṇdamayaṃ hi ānandabhukceto-
mukhaḥ prājñaḥ. (Māṇḍūkya, Tritīya pāda).
(b) Saptasthānontah prajñaḥ saptāṅgaḥ ekonaviṃśatimukhaḥ
praviviktabhuk taijaso. (Dvitīyapāda Māṇḍūkya)</F>As an eagle folds its wings
and falls down weary and tired, after flying round in
the air for a long time, the individual soul, avoiding
all desires and having no dreams, takes rest. The soul
sleeps in the nāḍī, with seventy-two thousand branches
called ‘hita’, like a child or a King or Brahman.
During sleep the mind, senses etc. are not destroyed.
They only keep away. They reappear when the man
wakes up from sleep.
<F>4) Tadyathāsminnākāśe śyeno vā suparṇo vā viparipatya śrāntaḥ
saṃhatya pakṣau saṃlayāyaiva dhriyata evam ayaṃ puruṣaḥ
etasmā antāya dhāvati, yatra supto na kaṃcana kāmaṃ kāmayate no
kaṃcana svapnaṃ pasyati.
(Brhadāraṇkyaa)</F>
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Turīyam.%} In the state of Turīya the Jīvātmā alone
is active. The individual souls which abide in creatures
are another aspect of Brahman. Everything said about
Brahman can be said about the jīvātmā in the state of
profound sleep. But the bliss that we enjoy in sleep is
not remembered in the state of activity. The same
bliss that we enjoy in profound sleep could be enjoyed
[Page337-a+ 65]
in the state of samādhi (contemplation) of yoga or
union with the universal soul. When it came to be
known that this supernal bliss could be enjoyed even
after one had awakened from contemplation, a fourth
state of the jīvātmā (individual soul) was recognized.
But in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka only three states of the
jīvātmā are mentioned.
<div n="NI"/>Immersion of the individual soul by the yogin in the
universal soul Brahman in the state of jāgrat or
activity is called Turīya. The individual soul which
is in the state of Turīya, is described as follows in the
Chāndogyopaniṣad.
<div n="NI"/>“The jīvātmā which is in the state of Turīya is not
conscious internally. He whose inner consciousness is
active is Taijasa. He is not bahiḥprajña (conscious of
the outer world). Bahiḥprajña is Vaiśvānara. He is
not a combination of Taijasa and Turīya. He is not
compact with consciousness as a conscious man not a
conscious man; nor is he an unconscious man. He, who
could be explained only by negations, cannot be seen.
He is unmanifestable, indiscernible, unthinkable,
indescribable and without any characteristic mark.
Only by unswerving faith could he be known. It
creates the universes and at the same time negates īt.
It is the supreme reality, the one without a second
(dvaita). This is the state of Turīya.
<F>1) Nāntah prajñaṃ na bahiḥprajñaṃ nobhayataḥ prajñaṃ na prajñānaghanaṃ na prajñaṃ nāprajñam adṛṣṭam avyāhāryam
agrāhyam alakṣaṇam acintyam avyapadeśyam ekātmapratyayasāraṃ prapañcopaśamaṃ śāntaṃ śivam advaitaṃ caturthaṃ manyate sa ātmā
sa vijñeyaḥ.</F>
<div n="NI"/>Vaiśvānara is called the soul with annamayakośa (the
material body), Taijasa, the soul with Prāṇamayakośa
(the sheath of the life breaths), Prājña, the soul with
Vijñānamayakośa (the sheath of understanding) and
Turīya, the soul with ānandamayakośa (the chest of
bliss).
<LEND>
