<L>2833<pc>338-b<k1>जलप्रलय<k2>जलप्रलय
JALAPRALAYA¦. In all the Asiatic Purāṇas, reference
to an ancient great flood, with slight changes occurs.
According to Hindu Purāṇas this great flood took place
before Mahāviṣṇu took the incarnation of Matsya. In
the Holy Bible which is the scripture of the Christians,
the story of the great flood is allied to the story of the
Noah. (See under Avatāra). This story occurs in the
Babylonian literature also. The book ‘Gilgamish’ which
is as old as the Ṛgveda, is considered to be the oldest
in the world. The theme of the Gilgamish is the travel
[Page339-a+ 65]
of a man named Gilgamish. This story is written in
twelve clay-tablets. After 1850, the scientists of England
who carried on an archaeological research, found in the
library of Ancient Nineveh, the most famous in the
ancient world, these twelve tablets along with twenty-
thousand other tablets, all of which were in good condi-
tion. This library was built by the King Aśurbānipāl
in 7th century B.C., on a very high place on the bank
of the river Tigris, in the ancient Nineveh.
<div n="NI"/>All these clay tablets have been removed to the British
Museum. It took several decades to decipher them.
When these clay tablets were discovered there was not a
single man who could read and understand them, in
the world. In spite of hard work, several years passed
by without getting even a single tablet deciphered. They
were written in ‘Accadean’, which was the language
of the court of Aśurbānipāl and the national and the
international language of the time. Another copy of
this great work was discovered on the bank of the Eu-
phrates, where the capital of the famous King Hāmu-
rābi of Ancient Babylon stood. Later discoveries dis-
closed that this great work Gilgamish was part and
parcel of the famous ancient civilization of the Oriental
countries. The Hittites and the Egyptians tried to trans-
late this book Gilgāmish into their own languages. In
the tablets with letters in the form of arrow heads, found
on the bank of the Nile, the portions which were diffi-
cult for them to translate, are given red marks.
<div n="NI"/>It was from a small piece of broken clay tablet that
clues to the origin of this famous work were obtained.
The world is indebted to the Sumerians, who had their
capital in the place where the city Ur stands, for the
original work of Gilgamish.
<div n="NI"/>Mention is made about a great flood in Gilgamish, as
follows: Gilgamish set out on an adventurous journey to
see his ancestor Utnāpiṣṭim to learn from him the means
of obtaining eternal life. The gods had told this man
about the secret of eternal life. At last Gilgamish reached
an island and found out his ancestor and asked him
about the secrets of eternal life. Utnāpiṣṭim said that
he had lived in ‘Śhoorappak’ and that he had been an
ardent devotee of ‘Iya’ God. When the gods decided
to destroy mankind by a great flood the God Iya called
his devotee Utnāpiṣṭim and said to him “You, man of
Śhoorappak, the son of Ūrbārtūtū: Demolish your house
and build a ship. Leave off your wealth and search for
your life. Cast away your property and save your life.
Bring the seeds of every living thing into the ship. The
ship you build should be according to measurements.”
The rest of the story is like the story of the “Ark of
Noah”. The scientists are of opinion that in pre-historic
times the three continents of Asia, Europe and Africa
were one continent and that by earthquake or some
other reason the south part of Europe had sunk down
and water flowed in and thus the Mediterranean Sea
came into existence. At a time when the far off regions
of the earth were unknown, the people who escaped
the flood imagined that the entire world had been sub-
merged by the flood. It could be imagined that this
story of the great flood passed on to posterity verbally
and after so many generations it appeared in different
regions in different languages in different forms.
<F>1) In writing about Jalapralaya. I have dealt with Gilgamish a little elaborately. Details on Gilgamish were obtained from the
English translation of a famous German work by Venar Keller. This book had not been received when I wrote about the work ‘Gilgamish’.
So these details are included under this word “Jalapralaya”.</F>
<LEND>
