<L>2847<pc>342-b<k1>जम्बूद्वीप<k2>जम्बूद्वीप
JAMBŪDVĪPA¦. One of the Purāṇically famous
Saptadvīpas (seven continents). These seven continents
are embankments separating the seven seas. Jambū-
dvīpa, Krauñcadvīpa, Śākadvīpa and Puṣkaradvīpa are
included in the seven islands.
<div n="NI"/>Jambūdvīpa has an area of one lakh of yojanas. The
island is round like a lotus flower. There are eight
long mountain ranges which divide the island into
nine countries, which look like nine petals of the lotus
flower. Each of these nine countries has an area of nine
thousand yojanas. The two countries of the north and
south extremities are bow-shaped. Four of the remain-
ing seven are longer than the rest. The central country
is square. This country is known as llāvṛtta, at the
centre of which there is the mountain Sumeru with
a height of one lakh of yojanas. This is called
Svarṇaparvata (The mountain of gold). The top of
this mountain is a great flat place with an area of
thirtythousand yojanas. This great plain is ten thousand
yojanas above the ground level. On the northern part
of Ilāvṛtta lie the three mountain ranges of Nīlagiri,
[Page343-a+ 65]
Śvetagiri and Śṛṅgavān, and midway between them
the three countries called Ramyaka, Hiraṇmaya and
Kuru. On the southern part of llāvṛtta, there are the
three mountains of Niṣadha, Hemakūṭa and Himālaya
and three countries Harivarṣa, Kimpuruṣa and
Bhārata. The mountain Mālyavān lies to the west and
Gandhamādana to the east of llāvṛtta. There are two
countries Ketumāla and Bhadrāśva having an area of
two thousand yojanas each with the two mountains
Nīla and Niṣadha as boundaries. At the foot of the
mount Mahāmeru, there are the mountains of
Mandara, Meru, Supārśvaka, Kumuda and many
others. On those mountains big trees like ñāval
(Syzygium jambolanum) Mākanda (Mango tree)
Kaṭambu (Naucka Candamba) banyan etc. grow in
plenty. On the top of these mountains there are four
lakes, full of milk, honey, juice of sugarcane and sweet
water. The devas become prosperous by the touch of
the water of these lakes. Besides these parks there are
four heavenly parks known as Nandana, Caitraratha,
Vaibhrāja and Sarvabhadraka. The women folk of the
devas (gods) and Gandharvas (demi-gods) play in
these parks, which are convenient for couples to carry
on lustful play. A river is formed there, by the juice
oozing from the fallen mango fruits. The river is
purple coloured and is called Aruṇānadī (river Aruṇā).
The goddess named Aruṇā lives here. The famous
Jambū tree is in this Jambūdvīpa. (Devī Bhāgavata,
Skandha 8).
<LEND>
