<L>2850<pc>343-a<k1>जम्बुकेश्वर<k2>जम्बुकेश्वर
JAMBUKEŚVARA¦. Name of an idol of Śiva (Liṅga)
installed in Mysore. The Śivaliṅga installed in the Jam-
bukeśvara temple in Mysore. Jambū is a fruit tree.
There is a story about how Śiva happened to come
under this tree.
<div n="NI"/>Once upon a time this place was full of Jambū trees,
and a recluse performing a penance under a Jambū
tree got a fruit of it. Attracted, so to say, by the sanctity
of the fruit the recluse submitted it first as an offering
[Page343-b+ 64]
to Lord Śiva, and only after that he ate it. As a result of
that the fruit germinated in the stomach of the sage
grew up into a tree and emerged into light and air
bursting his head open. Elated at this the sage danced
before God, who asked him to return to the place from
where he got the fruit. Accordingly he returned to
Tiruvānakovil and continued his penance. Pleased so
much with the Sage Śiva followed him and sat under
the tree. From that day onwards Śiva came to be
called Jambunātha. To this day Jambunātha sits under
the Jambū tree.
<div n="NI"/>Later, a temple came to be built there under the follow-
ing circumstances. A controversy arose between Māl-
yavān and Puṣpadanta, two of the Bhūtagaṇas of Śiva,
as to who cherished more devotion to the Lord. The
controversy developed into a quarrel and Puṣpadanta
cursed Mālyavān into a spider, and Mālyavān cursed
Puṣpadanta into an elephant. Now, when the mutual
curse took effect wisdom dawned on both Mālyavān and
Puṣpadanta, and they took refuge in the Lord for re-
demption from the curse. The Lord sent both of them to
the Cola country, and after wandering about in differ-
ent parts of the country both of them came to Jambu-
keśvara, and lived there worshipping God. The elephant
used to bathe daily in sacred tīrthas, bring holy water
in its trunk and make an offering of it to the Lord. As
for the spider it wove a net above the head of the Lord.
so that dried leaves did not fall on it. The elephant
used to daily sweep off the net above the head of the
Lord and make his offering of the water thereon. But,
the spider would again weave the net. Thus their quar-
rel continued. One day the spider, in great anger, got
into the trunk of the elephant and bit it hard. Due to
unbearable pain it smashed its trunk on a granite stone
and fell down dead. At this God appeared and blessed
both of them. The Lord also said that the sacred spot
would come to be known as Tiruvāna-Kovil (āna=
elephant; Kovil = temple) in memory of Puṣpadanta
who had taken the form of the elephant. The spider
was told that he would be born in the Cola dynasty
and carry on for long years many good acts. Accor-
dingly Mālyavān was born as the son of Śubhadeva, the
Cola king and Kamalāvatī, his queen, and ruled the
land for many years under the name King Ceṅkaṇṇa.
He it was who built the Jambukeśvara temple. (Tiru-
vānakkāvu Purāṇa).
<LEND>
