<L>2900<pc>350-b<k1>जातकर्मादिसंस्कार<k2>जातकर्मादिसंस्कार
JĀTAKARMĀDISAṂSKĀRA¦(S). In the ancient days
the people of Bhārata observed certain social and
customary rites immediately after the birth of a child.
They were known as Jātakarmans. Each caste had its
own jātakarmans. They are given below:
<div n="NI"/>If it is a male child jātakarman should be done before
cutting the umbilical cord. At that time gold is to be
rubbed in ghee and honey and the tongue of the child
should be touched with it, uttering mantras (spells)
(Colloquial name of this rite is giving gold and honey).
The child should be named on the tenth or twelfth day
after birth, selecting suitable lunar day, good star and
auspicious moment. The name should imply prosperity
to Brāhmans, might to Kṣatriyas, wealth to Vaiśyas
and humility to Śūdras. That is, the word ‘Śarman’
in the case of Brāhmaṇa, ‘Varman’ for Kṣatriyas,
‘Gupta’ for Vaiśyas and ‘Dāsa’ for Śūdras, should be
added to the name. The names given to girls should
be of easy utterance, having clear meaning but not
cruel, very beautiful, charming, and propitious
avoiding long letters as far as possible. Four months
after delivery, the child should be taken out of the
room of confinement to see the Sun. On the sixth
month the rite of ‘Annaprāśa’ (feeding with rice)
should be performed. In accordance with hereditary
customs the two rites mentioned above may be per-
formed at any time after the third month. For
Brāhmaṇas and Kṣatriyas the ceremony of ‘Caula’
(tonsure) may be performed at the time of birth or at
the age of three. The ceremony of Upanayana (Investi-
ture with the Brāhma string) should be conducted at
the age of eight from pregnancy for Brāhmaṇas, at the
age of eleven from pregnancy for Kṣatriyas and at the
age of twelve for Vaiśyas. But Upanayana could be
performed at the age of five for Brāhmaṇas who desire
Brāhma-radiance, at the age of six for Kṣatriyas who
desire might and at the age of eight for Vaiśyas who
desire wealth. There is another opinion that Upana-
yana could be performed up to the age of sixteen for
Brāhmaṇas and twentytwo for Kṣatriyas. Even after
the attainment of this age, if this ceremony is not
performed, that boy will be considered an out-cast from
the mantra (spell) of Gāyatrī, and will have no
admittance to the rituals and ceremonies performed by
Brāhmaṇas and will be known by the name Vrātya
(an outcast, uninvested Brāhmaṇa). These Vrātyas
could not be taught Vedas or be given women as
wives.
<div n="NI"/>Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya and Vaiśya brahmacāris (celibates)
could use the hides of black antelope, spotted deer or
goat as upper garment and clothes made of silk thread,
flax or wool of sheep or red leopard. To tie round the
waist, Brāhmaṇas have to make belts out of Muñja
(grass), Kṣatriyas, out of Mūrva (grass) and Vaiśyas
out of flax. When these are not available, Brāhmaṇas
may use Kuśa grass, Kṣatriyas ñānal grass and Vaiśyas
Darbha grass called balbaja to make belts of customary
three darns or five darns with a knot. A celibate should
have a stick. For Brāhmaṇas the stick should be made
of Bilva (Aegle marmelos) or “palāśa” (Butea frondosa)
and for Kṣatriyas, of banyan or blackwood. (Mimosa
catechu) and for Vaiśyas, of Dillenia speciosa (Uka
tree) or fig tree. For Brāhmaṇas the stick should
[Page351-a+ 65]
reach up to the top of the head, for Kṣatriyas up to the
forehead and for Vaiśyas up to the nose. Before going
for alms, the celibate should take his stick, bow before
the sun, go round the fire and only then set out. The
alms received should be offered to the teacher as
oblation, then he should turn to the east and wash hands
and mouth and eat it. Brāhmaṇas should wear
the upper garment or their sacred thread (Yajña-
sūtra) on the left shoulder and under the right arm and
then it is called ‘Upavīta’; if it is on the right shoulder
and under the left arm it is called “Prācīnāvīta” and
if it is round the neck it is called “Nivīta”.
<div n="NI"/>These Jātakarmans may be done for the female child
also at the stipulated times by tantras, without reciting
mantras, for the purification of the body. The rituals
performed without reciting Vedamantras (spells) are
called tantras. For women marriage is to be considered
as Upanayana, looking after the needs of husband to be
considered as learning at the house of the teacher, and
housekeeping as samidādhāna (gathering fuel of Butea
frondosa). (Manusmṛti, Chapter 2).
<LEND>
