<L>2964<pc>355-a<k1>जयन्ती<k2>जयन्ती<h>II
JAYANTĪ II¦. Daughter of Indra and sister of Jayanta.
In Bhāgavata, Skandha 4, there is a story stating
how Jayantī was the wife of Śukra for ten years.
<div n="NI"/>Śukrācārya was the teacher-priest of the Asuras
(demons). Once the devas (gods) had completely de-
feated the Asuras. With the intention of procuring
new powers from Śrī Parameśvara, Śukrācārya went to
Kailāsa. When the penance of Śukra became more
and more severe the gods and Indra began to be
flurried. Indra told his daughter Jayantī to become the
servant of Śukra and to break his penance somehow or
other. Jayantī did not like this procedure of her father.
Still she did not like to disobey her father. So she
went to Kailāsa and became the attendant of Śukra
and stayed with him. She served him dutifully and
with chastity. She would fan him with plantain leaf.
She would prepare cold and fragrant water for him
to drink. When the Sun became hotter she would hold
her upper garment as an umbrella so that he should
be in the shade. She would gather fully ripened good
fruits for him to eat. She would gather good variety
of darbha grass, cut them into the length of a span and
with good flowers she would give them to the hermit
for his morning oblations. She would gather soft
sprouts and make bed for him and would stand near
him fanning till he slept. She would get water ready
for him to rinse his mouth when he woke up. Thus she
did the work of a dutiful disciple. She did not, in any
way by speech or action, try to entice him so that his
vow of penance might be broken. She spoke only words
which would be pleasing and helpful to him. This
continued for thousand years and then Paramaśiva
appeared before him and gave the boons he requested
for. After that Śukrācārya talked with her. In accor-
dance with her request the hermit Śukra allowed her to
live with him for ten years as his wife. He gave her a
boon that during that period of ten years they both
would be invisible to the world. Thus Śukrācārya
married Jayantī and they lived in the house very happily
for ten years.
<LEND>
