<L>2969<pc>355-b<k1>जयशर्मन्<k2>जयशर्मन्
JAYAŚARMAN¦. A Brāhmaṇa who became wealthy by
taking the vow of Kamalā (Kamalāvrata). Kamalā is
the eleventh day of ‘Adhimāsa’.
<div n="NI"/>It is believed that this day is better than other days. If
a man fasts on that day Goddess Kamalā will be pleased
with him.
<div n="NI"/>The devotee should awake in the Brāhma muhūrta
(fortyeight minutes before sunrise) and take bath
thinking of Puruṣottama and begin the fast. If the
prayer and meditation is conducted at the house he
will get double the fruits. If it is at a river it will
yield four times the fruits. If it is at a cow-shed the
fruits will be thousandfold and if it is conducted at
a fireshed or Śaivite temple, at a holy bath or in the
presence of God the fruits will be a thousand and one
hundredfold and if it is near a tulasī (holy basil) the
fruits will be a lakhfold and if it is done in the
presence of Viṣṇu the fruits obtained will be un-
limited.
<div n="NI"/>This Jayaśarman who took the fast was the son of a
noble Brāhmaṇa named Śivaśarman of Avantī. He was
the youngest of five sons. He became a wicked man. So
he was avoided by his relatives. Being driven away
from home, he went to a distant forest and lived there.
Once, by luck, he happened to reach the holy place of
Triveṇī Mahātīrtha. He was very tired of hunger and
thirst. So he bathed in the tīrtha and searched for some
hermitage. By chance he saw the hermitage of Harimitra
As it was the month of Puruṣottama many people had
gathered there. Brāhmaṇas were telling stories of miti-
gation of sins. He heard the story of the vow called
Kamalāvrata and its fruits. So Jayaśarman stayed in that
hermitage with them and took the vow of Kamalāvrata.
That night Devī appeared before him and said: “I have
come from Vaikuṇṭha, because I am greatly pleased with
you. Since you have taken the vow of Kamalāvrata on
the eleventh day of the dark lunar fortnight called
Kamalā of the month of Puruṣottama I will grant you
boons. Because you have taken the vow at Triveṇī, I am
immensely pleased with you. The noble Brāhmaṇas of
your future generations also will be blessed by me”.
Saying these words the Devī gave him boons and dis-
appeared. From that day onwards Jayaśarmā became a
great wealthy man and he returned to his father's house
(Padma Purāṇa, Chapter 64).
<LEND>
