<L>2996<pc>356-b<k1>जीमूतवाहन<k2>जीमूतवाहन
JĪMŪTAVĀHANA¦. A Vidyādhara. (demi-god). He was
the son of Jīmūtaketu, who was the ruler of a city
named Kāñcanapura in a valley of the Himālayas. Be-
ing childless he had been sad for a long time. At last
he approached the divine tree Kalpaka (a heavenly tree
that yields every wish) that stood in his garden and
requested it to bless him with a child. Thus a son was
born to him. The famous Jīmūtavāhana was that son.
When Jīmūtavāhana came to know of the divine powers
of the Kalpaka tree, from the ministers, with the per-
mission of his father he went to the Kalpaka tree,
bowed before it and said to it, “Oh noble tree! You have
[Page357-a+ 65]
granted all the wishes of my forefathers. But I have one
wish. No body should be miserable in the world. So I
wish to give you to the world with that purpose in
view”. Instantly an ethereal voice said from the tree.
“If you are forsaking me I am going away. But I will
fulfil your wish.” Thus according to the wish of Jīmū-
tavāhana the Kalpaka tree shed gold everywhere in the
world and then went to heaven and disappeared. The
earth became wealthy and prosperous. The fame of
Jīmūtavāhana spread throughout the three worlds, and
all the Vidyādharas grew jealous of him. As the heavenly
tree Kalpaka, which yielded all the wishes, had return-
ed to heaven, they thought it the most propitious time
and arrayed their army against Jīmūtavāhana. His
father Jīmūtaketu had completed all preparations to
meet the enemy. But Jīmūtavāhana approached his
father and said, “Father ! I am perfectly sure that no
body could defeat you in battle. But see how mean
it is to destroy so many lives and win the country mere-
ly for the pleasures of this fragile body. So let us go
away from here. Leave the kingdom to them.”
<div n="NI"/>Jīmūtaketu, who was pleased at this generous nature
of his son, respected his wish and went with his family
to the Malaya mountain and lived there. Mitrāvasu,
the son of Viśvāvasu, the King of the Siddhas and
Jīmūtavāhana became close friends. One day Jīmūta-
vāhana was wandering about in the forest when he saw
in the middle of a garden a temple dedicated to Devī
and a young woman of exquisite beauty, surrounded by
her maids, singing hymns and worshipping Devī. Jīmū-
tavāhana was attracted by her extra-ordinary beauty.
Love budded in her heart also. On enquiry it was
understood that she was Malayavatī, the sister of Mit-
rāvasu. After that both of them engaged in a little talk
of love-making. Hearing her mother calling, Malaya-
vatī instantly went home. Being fallen head-long in
love, Jīmūtavāhana spent the night somehow or other
and at dawn reached the temple with a hermit boy.
While the hermit boy was consoling Jīmūtavāhana
Malayavatī also came there. Jīmūtavāhana and his
friend hid behind a tree. She was alone, and since she
could not bear separation from her lover she decided
to commit suicide and standing at the steps, she said
“Devi ! If it is impossible to get that Jīmūtavāhana as
my husband in this birth, let it be so. But bless me that
I may have my wish granted in the next birth at least”.
Saying this she tied one end of her upper garment on
the tree and tried to commit suicide. Instantly there
was an ethereal voice which said, “Daughter, don't do
such rash things. Jīmūtavāhana will become your hus-
band. He will become the emperor of the Vidyādharas
also.” Jīmūtavāhana-came and untied the knot of the
upper garment with his own hands and saved her from
death. Her maid appeared and said with delight.
“Friend! you are very lucky. Today I heard what prince
Mitrāvasu said to his father Viśvāvasu. Thus he said
‘Father! Jīmūtavāhana who gave away his own Kal-
paka tree for the welfare of others has come to this place.
It will bring prosperity to us, if we show our hospitality
to this noble guest by giving our Malayavatī to him. It
is very difficult to get such a noble man for my sister
anywhere else.” The father consented. The prince ins-
tantly went to the abode of this gentleman. I think the
marriage will take place today. So come, let us go
home.”
[Page357-b+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>With his heart overflowing with joy, Jīmūtavāhana
went to his house. Mitrāvasu was there. He revealed
the purpose of his coming. Jīmūtavāhana, who had the
remembrance of his previous births told Mitrāvasu that
in the previous birth also they had been friends and
that Malayavatī had been his wife. Thus their marriage
took place. Delightful days of the married life passed
one by one. One day Jīmūtavāhana and Mitrāvasu
went for a walk. They reached a forest on the seashore.
Seeing some bones there Jīmūtavāhana asked Mitrā-
vasu about them. Mitrāvasu said: “In ancient days
Kadrū, the mother of Nāgas (serpents) made Vinatā,
the mother of Garuḍa, her slave by some trick. Garuḍa
liberated his mother from slavery. But the hatred
increased day by day and Garuḍa began to eat serpents,
the children of Kadrū. Seeing this, Vāsuki the King
of Nāgas entered into a contract with Garuḍa, so as to
prevent the nāgas from being destroyed altogether. The
arrangement was that Vāsuki would send a serpent
everyday to Garuḍa. Garuḍa ate all those serpents
sent by Vāsuki in this place. These are the bones of
those poor snakes.”
<div n="NI"/>When Jīmūtavāhana heard this story his heart was
filled with pity. He decided to save the life of at least
one serpent by giving his body instead. But the
presence of Mitrāvasu was an obstacle to carry out
his wish. At that particular moment a minister of
Viśvāvasu appeared there and took away Mitrāvasu
saying that he was wanted by his father. Left alone,
Jīmūtavāhana stood there when he saw a young man
coming with an old woman who was crying bitterly.
On enquiry Jtmūtavāhana learned that in accordance
with the agreement with Garuḍa, the old woman was
bringing her only son Śaṅkhacūḍa to give him as food
to Garuḍa. Jīmūtavāhana told them that he would
take the place of Śaṅkhacūḍa that day. The mother
and the son reluctantly agreed to his desire. The old
woman went away crying and Śaṅkhacūḍa went to the
temple.
<div n="NI"/>Hearing the sound of Garuḍa's wings Jīmūtavāhana
laid himself on a stone and Garuḍa taking him in his
beaks flew to the top of the Malaya Mountain. On the
way the jewel of Jīmūtavāhana known as ‘Cūḍāratna’,
which was soaked in blood fell down, in front of
Malayavatī. Knowing that it was the jewel of her
husband, with a terrible cry she ran to her father.
Because of his knowledge of arts and sciences,
Jīmūtaketu also knew everything and with his wife and
daughter he went to the top of the Malaya mountain.
<div n="NI"/>In the meanwhile, Śaṅkhacūḍa, having done obeisance
to ‘Gokarṇanātha’ (God), came back to the stone
where he had left Jīmūtavāhana and seeing a pool of
fresh blood, became sad and silent. Then determining
that he would save Jīmūtavāhana at any cost, he
went up the mountain following the track of the blood
drops.
<div n="NI"/>Garuḍa took Jīmūtavāhana to the peak of the mountain
and began to peck at him. Jīmūtavāhana grew more
and more delightful as the pecking became harder.
Garuḍa looked at him with wonder and thought,
“Surely, this is not a nāga. It must be a Gandharva or
somebody else.” Not knowing what to do he sat looking
at his prey, who invited him to finish off his meal. By
this time Śaṅkhacūḍa had reached the spot. Soon
Jīmūtaketu with his wife and Malayavatī also arrived.
[Page358-a+ 64]
They all cried aloud. Garuḍa was in great confusion.
When he knew that he was about to eat the famous
Jīmūtavāhana, who had given away even the Kalpaka
tree for the good of others, Garuḍa was filled with
remorse. Instantly Jīmūtavāhana died. The parents
and Śaṅkhacūḍa cried beating their breasts. Malayavatī
fell on the ground and cried. Then looking up she
called out with tears. “Ha ! Devi ! Jagadambikā ! you
have told me that my husband would become the
emperor of the Vidyādharas. Has your boon become
futile because of my misfortune?” Devī appeared and
said “Daughter ! My words will not become futile.”
Then Devī sprinkled Amṛta (ambrosia) on Jīmūta-
vāhana and brought him to life. He sprang up more
radiant than before, and was anointed as emperor
of the Vidyādharas by Devī. When Devī disappeared
Garuḍa who was much pleased, told Jīmūtavāhana
to ask for any boon.
<div n="NI"/>Jīmūtavāhana requested for the boon that Garuḍa
should stop eating the Nāgas and that all the serpents
who had been reduced to bones should be brought to
life again. Garuḍa granted him that boon. All the
serpents which had been killed by Garuḍa came to
life again. All the gods and hermits came there with
joy. After all had gone, Jīmūtavāhana went with his
relatives to the Himālayas as the emperor of Vidyā-
dharas.
<F>1) This story is told to the king Trivikramasena by Vetāla. See under Trivikramasena.</F> (Kathāsaritsāgara, Saśāṅkavatī Lambaka,
Taraṅga 23).
<LEND>
