<L>3018<pc>360-a<k1>ज्यामघ<k2>ज्यामघ
JYĀMAGHA¦. A King born in the dynasty of Ikṣvāku.
(Harivaṃśa, Chapter 36).
<div n="NI"/>Five sons, who were equal to gods, named Sahasrada,
Payoda, Kroṣṭā, Nīla and Ājika were born to Yadu of
the family of Ikṣvāku. Several noble persons were born
in the family of Kroṣṭā. A noble and broadminded son
named Vṛjinīvān was born to Kroṣṭā. Śvāhi was born
to Vṛjinīvān, Ruśeku to Śvāhi, Citraratha to Ruśeku
and Śaśabindu to Citraratha. Thousand sons were born
to Śaśabindu who was an emperor. Important among
those thousand who were blessed with radiance, fame,
wealth and beauty, were Pṛthuśravas, Pṛthuyaśas,
Pṛthutejas, Pṛthubhava, Pṛthukīrti and Pṛthumati.
Uśanas was the son of Pṛthuśravas, Śineyu was the son
of Uśanas and Rukmakavaca the son of Śineyu. Ruk-
makavaca killed all the archers and conquered the
countries and performing aśvamedha (horse sacrifice)
gave away all the countries he conquered, as gift to
Brāhmaṇas. Five sons were born to Rukmakavaca. Jyā-
magha was one of them. His brothers were Rukmeṣu,
Pṛthurukma, Parigha and Hari. Of them Parigha and
Hari were made Kings of foreign countries. Rukmeṣu
was given the country ruled by his father. Pṛthurukma
served Rukmeṣu. They drove Jyāmagha away from the
country.
<div n="NI"/>Jyāmagha went to the forest and erected a hermitage
for him. Then according to the advice of a Brahmin, he
who was an old man took bow and arrow and got into
a chariot flying a flag and went to the bank of the
river Narmadā. He had neither wealth nor attendants.
He stayed on the mountain Ṛkṣavān eating fruits and
roots. His wife Śaibyā also had become old. They had
no children. Still Jyāmagha did not marry anybody
else. Once Jyāmagha came out victorious in a fight in
which he got a girl. Jyāmagha took the girl to his wife
and told her, “This girl shall be the wife of your son.”
She asked him how that could be when she had no
son. He said, “She will become the wife of the son who
is going to be born to you.” As a result of severe
penance a son named Vidarbha was born to Śaibyā.
The damsel who became the wife of Vidarbha gave
birth to two sons named Kratha and Kaiśika. (Padma
Purāṇa, Chapter 13).
<LEND>
