<L>304<pc>038-b<k1>अङ्गराजवंश<k2>अङ्गराजवंश
AṄGARĀJAVAṂŚA¦. (THE DYNASTY OF AṄGA
KINGS). Descended from Viṣṇu in the following order:
Brahmā-Atri-Candra-Budha-Purūravas-Āyus-Nahuṣa-
Yayāti. Yadu, Turvasu, Druhyu and Anudruhyu were
the four sons of Yayāti. The Aṅga dynasty starts from
Turvasu, one of the four. The following are the descen-
dants of Turvasu. Varga was the son of Turvasu,
Gobhānu, the son of Varga, Traiśāni the son of Gobhānu,
Karandhama, the son of Traiśāni, Marutta, the son of
Karandhama, Duṣyanta, the son of Marutta, Varūtha,
[Page039-a+ 65]
the son of Duṣyanta, Gāṇḍira the son of Varūtha, and
Gāndāra the son of Gāṇḍira. The five powerful peoples,
the Gāndhāras, the Colas, the Keralas, the Pāṇḍyas
and the Kolas have descended from Gāndhāra.
<div n="NI"/>Two sons, Druhyu and Babhrusetu were born to Gāndhāra.
Babhrusetu begot Purovasu; Purovasu begot Gāndhārī.
From Gāndhārī Gharma was born, from Gharma Ghṛta
was born, from Ghṛta Viduṣa was born, and from Viduṣa
Pracetas was born. Pracetas got a hundred children of
whom the prominent were Anidra, Sabhānara, Cākṣuṣa and
Parameṣu. To Sabhānara was born Kālānala and Sṛñ-
jaya to Kālānala, Purañjaya to Sṛñjaya and Janamejaya
to Purañjaya. Mahāsāla was the son of Janamejaya;
Mahāmanas the son of Mahāsāla, and Uśinara the son
of Mahāmanas. To Uśīnara were born Nṛga, Nara,
Kṛmi, Suvrata and Śibi by his wives Nṛgā, Narā, Kṛmi,
Daśā and Dṛṣadvatī respectively. To Śibi were born
four sons called Pṛthudarbha, Vīraka, Kaikaya and
Bhadraka. Four separate kingdoms arose in the names
of them. Uśīnara had another son called Titikṣu. From
Titikṣu was born Ruṣadratha; from Ruṣadratha was
born Paila, from Paila was born Sutapas and from
Sutapas was born the great hermit Bāli. From Bāli,
Aṅga, Vaṅga, Kaliṅga, Puṇḍra, Bāleya and Bālayogi
were born. To Aṅga was born Dadhivāhana. The King
Draviratha was the son of Dadhivāhana, Dharmaratha
the son of Draviratha, Citraratha the son of Dharma-
rātha, and Satyaratha was the son of Citraratha. To
Satyaratha was born Lomapāda; to Lomapāda was
born Caturaṅga; to Caturaṅga was born Pṛthulākṣa, to
Pṛthulākṣa was born Campa; to Campa was born Har-
yaṅga, to Haryaṅga was born Bhadraratha, to Bhadra-
ratha was born Bṛhatkarmā, to Bṛhatkarmā was born
Bṛhadbhānu, to Bṛhadbhānu was born Bṛhadātmā,
to Bṛhadātmā was born Jayadratha, to Jayadratha was
born Bṛhadratha and to Bṛhadratha was born Viśvajit.
After that Karṇa became the King of Aṅga. The son of
Karṇa was Vṛṣasena and the son of Vṛsasena was
Pṛthusena. These are the kings of the Aṅga dynasty.
(Agni Purāṇa, Chapter 277.)
<LEND>
