<L>305<pc>039-a<k1>अङ्गारक<k2>अङ्गारक<h>I
AṄGĀRAKA I¦. An Asura who took the form of a pig.
The story of how this Asura was killed by his daughter
Aṅgāravatī, is given below.
<div n="NI"/>Long ago there was an emperor named Mahendra-
varmā in Ujjayinī. His son Mahāsena did penance for
a long time to get a wife and a sword. At last Devī
appeared and granted the boon: “My son! take this
extraordinary sword. So long as you have this sword,
your enemies will not prevail against you. Aṅgāravatī,
the renowned beauty of the three worlds, who is the
daughter of the Asura Aṅgāraka, will become your
wife in due course. As you do horrible deeds, you will
be called Caṇḍamahāsena”. He was given the sword
and a tusker called Naḍāgiri. One day Mahāsena went
to the forest for hunting. He saw a very large pig. The
King used his arrows. But they did little harm to the
pig. Moreover it turned the chariot of the King over
to one side and ran to a cave. The King followed it
with fury. On the way he sat on the bank of a lake
with wonder, for a lady of exquisite beauty was walk-
ing along the mossy turf in the midst of some maids.
Slowly she approached the King and talked with him.
The young lady had entirely captured the heart of the
King, who told her everything. She began to weep.
“Who are you? Why do you weep?” The King asked
[Page039-b+ 65]
her. She replied with a deep sigh. “The pig you saw,
is my father Aṅgārakāsura. His body is as hard as
diamond and not vulnerable to any sort of weapon.
These maids have been caught by him from various
royal houses and brought here for my help. My name
is Aṅgāravatī. My father was changed to a giant by a
curse. Now he is asleep discarding the form of pig.
When he wakes up, filled with hunger and thirst, he
will do you harm. My tears flowed out in the form of
heated life-breaths, when I thought of these things.”
<div n="NI"/>The King said, “Go and sit by him and cry when he
wakes up. He will ask the reason. Then tell him that
you had been crying, when you thought how forlorn
you would be without a mate, in case your father was
killed by somebody”. Aṅgāravatī did as she was told.
Hearing her words Aṅgāraka said, “My daughter! No
body can kill me. My body is made of diamond. There
is only one vulnerable point in my body which is on
my left forearm and it is always covered with my
bow.”
<div n="NI"/>The king hid himself closely and heard everything. He
fought with the Asura and hitting at the vulnerable
point killed him. The king married Aṅgāravatī and
took her to his palace. Two sons were born to him.
They were called Gopālaka and Pālaka. By the grace
of Indra a daughter also was born to him by her and
she was Vāsavadattā, the wife of the famous Udayana.
(Kathāsaritsāgara, Kathāmukhalambaka, Taraṅga 3).
<LEND>
