<L>3433<pc>400-b<k1>कौशिक<k2>कौशिक<h>VI
KAUŚIKA VI¦. A hermit. This ancient hermit lived in
Kurukṣetra. His sons Svasṛpa, Krodhana, Hiṃsra,
Piśuna, Kavi, Vāgduṣṭa, and Pitṛvarttī lived with
hermit Garga for learning under him. Their names
indicated their character. Their father died. The sons
were in poverty. At this time rain ceased altogether.
Garga asked his disciples to take his milch cow to the
forest for grazing. Owing to hunger the brothers decid-
ed to kill and eat the cow. But the youngest said: “If
you are bent on killing the cow, we had better make
use of it as an offering to the Manes, and no sin will
visit us.”
<div n="NI"/>All agreed to this and Pitṛvarttī killed the cow and
began the sacrifice. Two elder brothers were employed
in worshipping the gods and three were detailed to give
offerings to the manes. One was asked to be the guest.
Pitṛvarttī was the sacrificer. Remembering the
ancestors with reverence he began the sacrifice in
accordance with the rites. Thus the seven hermits ate
the cow and told Garga that the cow was caught by a
tiger.
<div n="NI"/>In due course the seven of them died, and took rebirth
as rude low-caste people in Dāśapura. Because of the
sacrifice and offerings to the Manes they had the
remembrance of their previous birth. So they feared
god and took fast and vow at a holy bath and in the
presence of a multitude cast off their lives and were
born again as animals in Kālañjara hills. Because of
their abstinence due to knowledge they cast off their
lives by Prapatana (jumping down from the top of the
mountain) and were born again as Ruddy geese, in the
Mānasasaras when their names were Sumanas, Kusuma,
Vasu, Citradarśī, Sudarśī, Jñātā and Jñānapāraga—
names conforming to their character. The seven brothers
became pure and sinless by their union with God the
[Page401-a+ 65]
Supreme Spirit. But three of them fell out of the union
because of their desire. They saw the pleasurable life
led by Aṇuha the King of Pāñcāla who was immensely
wealthy with many beautiful wives. At the sight of this,
one of the geese—the Brahmin Pitṛvartti, who performed
the sacrifice of offering to the Manes because of his love
for his father—wished to become a king. Seeing the two
wealthy ministers who led luxurious lives, two of the
ruddy geese wanted to become ministers. Accordingly
Pitṛvartti was born as Brahmadatta the son of Vaibh-
rāja and the other two as sons of ministers with names
Puṇḍarīka and Subālaka. Brahmadatta was anointed
as King of Pāñcāla in the great city of Kāmpilya. That
King was mighty, loving his father well, always desirous
of giving offerings to Manes and harmonious with God,
having the ability to read the hearts of every living
being. He married Sannati the daughter of Sudeva.
This woman in her previous birth was the cow of
Garga. As this cow was used as offering to the Manes
she got rebirth as a religious-minded woman and be-
came the queen of Brahmadatta, who ruled over the
kingdom well for a long time.
<div n="NI"/>Once the King and the queen were walking in the
garden when they saw two ants which were quarrelling
with each other. They were husband and wife. After
a time the quarrel ended and they grew more loving
than before and the she-ant pressed closely against her
husband. Brahmadatta hearing their conversation stood
smiling. He could understand the language of every
living being because of the merits of his previous births.
When the King smiled his wife asked him for the rea-
son. He described to his wife the quarrel of the ant-
couple. The queen did not believe his words. She
thought that the King had been making fun of her.
She asked him how he learned the language of birds
and beasts. But the King could not give an answer and
he became thoughtful. The remaining four of the ruddy
geese took rebirth as the sons of a poor Brahmin in the
same city of Kāmpilya. They had the remembrance of
previous births. Their names were Dhṛtimān, Sarva-
darśī, Vidyācandra and Tapodhika, names befitting
their character. They decided to perform severe penance
to attain Supreme bliss, and were about to get away
from the house when their father, the poor Brahmin
cried bitterly, being helpless. They taught their father
the following poem and advised him to recite the poem
before the King the next morning, in order to get plenty
of wealth.
<Poem>“Noble Brahmins in Kurukṣetra
The seven foresters in Dāśapura
Deer in Kālañjara and in Mānasa
Ruddy geese, the same now are men.”</Poem>
Brahmadatta who was not able to give answer to the
question of his wife, was about to go out from the palace
for a walk with his wife and ministers, when the old brah-
min made his appearance and recited the poem taught
by his sons, to the King. When the King heard the
stanza he remembered the previous births and fainted
and fell down. The two ministers, Subālaka son of
Bābhravya the author of the science of love and Puṇḍa-
rīka son of Pāñcāla the author of the science of medicine
and treatment, also remembered about their previous
births and fell down with grief. The three of them
lamented about their fall from the union with the Sup-
reme Spirit. Brahmadatta gave that old Brahmin plenty
[Page401-b+ 65]
of wealth and villages and sent him away contented.
After anointing his son Viṣvaksena as King, Brahmadatta
and his retinue went to Mānasasaras for penance.
For a while they lived in the forest engaged in penance
and then cast off their lives and entered the world of
Supreme bliss. (Padma Purāṇa, Part 3, Chapter 10).
<LEND>
