<L>3583<pc>414-b<k1>कोल्लवर्ष<k2>कोल्लवर्ष
KOLLAVARṢA¦. (MALAYĀLAM ERA). Several opinions
have been brought forward about the starting of the
Malayālam Era. There is great controversy as to the
causes of starting this new era. The opinion of Śaṅ-
kuṇṇi Menon is as follows. The King Udayamārtaṇḍa-
varmā called together at Quilon, an assembly of the
learned men and astronomers of the time, in Kalivarṣa
3926 (A.D. 825) and made astronomical researches and
taking into account the movements and positions of the
various planets in the solar system, started a new era
beginning with the month of Ciṅṅam (August-Septem-
ber). This new era commenced on the 15th of August
825 A.D. All the learned men and scholars of the time
welcomed this Malayālam era. The neighbouring king-
doms also recognized this new era. Reckoning of dates
based on this Malayālam Era is seen in the ‘Madura
and Tinnevelly Stone-edicts and copper edicts.’ On
the fifth day of Ciṅṅaṃ of the first year of M.E., five
royal families of Travancore met together and took a
decision that the festival days of the temples should be
reckoned according to the Malayālam Era. The contro-
versy is not about the starting of the new Era, but the
reasons for starting the new era.
<div n="NI"/>Logan says that the Malayālam Era was started in
commemoration of the conversion of Ceramān Perumāl
to Islam and his pilgrimage to Mecca. But there is im-
propriety in thinking that the Hindu subjects of a King
would commemorate the conversion of their King into
Islam religion. Some say that the new era was started
to commemorate the erection of a Śaivite temple. An-
other argument is that a new era was started in memory
of the exhortation of Śrī Śaṅkarācārya to the Brahmins
of Quilon, to do away with the irregularities seen in the
Hindu religion. The period of Śaṅkarācārya has not
yet been decided definitely. The opinion accepted by
scholars on this subject is that of K.B. Pathak, accord-
ing to whom Śaṅkarācārya lived from 787 to 819 A.D.
If this is accepted as true, the exhortation made in
825 A.D. should be by somebody else and the Malayā-
[Page415-a+ 65]
lam Era should have been established for some ot her
reasons.
<div n="NI"/>Another opinion is that the new era was established
to commemorate the independence given to the two
Kolattiri Kings (North and South) by the Perumāl. The
North Kolattiri family should have begun the new era
on the first day of Kanni (the second month) and the
South Kolattiri family on the first day of Ciṅṅaṃ
(the first month). (Because in Malabar area, the era
commences on the first day of Kanni.). Another opinion
that is prevalent is that Kollavarṣa was started to com-
memorate the erection of the two towns of Quilon
(North and South). But even two centuries before A.D.
825 the town of South Quilon had become famous. So it
is an objection to this argument. Some are of opinion
that a new era was started in commemoration of
Śaṅkaravijaya (the victory of Śaṅkara) due to the
fact that the Brahmins of the north and the south
alike accepted the teachings of Śaṅkarācārya. But it is
difficult to believe that the northerners and the souther-
ners accepted the teachings of Śaṅkarācārya on a parti-
cular date and issued a declaration to that effect and
started a new era. Some connect the starting of the
New Era with the ‘Tiruvoṇam’ a grand festival of the
Malayālees. But it cannot be believed that a national
festival was started by a single man. According to
Logan it would appear that the grand festival of Tiru-
voṇam was started to commemorate the journey of
Perumāl to Mecca. But the conversion episode is more
likely to be considered as a blasphemy and the Kings
and people of Malayāla land are not likely to com-
memorate it. Prof. Sundaran Pillai has cut all the
arguments given above and brought forward a new
theory. His inference is that the new Era is the trans-
formation of an old era known as Saptarṣivatsara
(year of the seven sages) or Śāstrasaṃvatsara (scien-
tific year) which prevailed throughout India and
is still in force in Kaśmīra. In A.D. 897 Saptarṣi-
Vatsara was 4972 and it was known as merely 72, and
that if all the hundreds are taken away, the remaining
figure will be the same as that of the Kollavarṣa. That
is, at the expiry of each century the Saptarṣivatsara
begins as one, two and so on. But the Saptarṣivatsara
begins in the month of Meṭam (9th month) where-
as Kollavarṣa begins in Ciṅṅam. He explains this differ-
ence also. His opinion is that the Nambūtiri Brahmins
took some time to reach the country of Malayāla from
North Indian countries and they had been using their
Saptarṣivatsara up to the time of their arrival in Mala-
yāla and after their arrival they adopted some slight
modifications in the era according to the requirements
of the new settlement, and renewed the Saptarṣivatsara.
Gopala lyer, the great exponent of the Vedānta
philosophy, says as follows about Kollavarṣa in his
‘Chronology of Ancient India’: “Kaliyuga and
Kollavarṣa commenced in B.C. 1176.” But Kollavarṣa
is divided into groups of recurring thousands. This
has a close connection with Saptarṣi Vatsara, which
also might have commenced in B.C. 1176. The year
mentioned above completed 2000 by A.D. 824. The
third recurring thousand begins in A.D. 825, under the
name Kollavarṣa.
<div n="NI"/>Princent, Buchanan and Burnell are the three memo-
rable western scholars who have expressed their
opinions about Kollavarṣa. Pṛincent connected
[Page415-b+ 63]
Kollavarṣa with Paraśurāma. Buchanan said that
the Malayālees have a recurring of every millennium.
Burnell has stated in his book “South Indian Paleo-
graphy”, that the theory of recurring Millennium is
wrong.
<div n="NI"/>An astronomer who was a contemporary of the King
who established the Malayālam era has stated in his
work called ‘Śaṅkaranārāyaṇīya’ (a manuscript in
Palm leaves) that an astronomical movement was
reckoned and a new era was started at Quilon. This
palm leaf manuscript is kept in the Manuscripts
Library at Trivandrum.
<LEND>
