<L>3830<pc>441-a<k1>कुमुद्वती<k2>कुमुद्वती<h>I
KUMUDVATĪ I¦. Wife of King Vimarśana of Kirāta-
deśa. Kumudvatī requested him one day, to put a
stop to his cruelties against the people. His reply was
as follows:—“Oh! dear wife, don't feel sorry. In my
past life I was a dog and, starved almost to death. I
went to the gates of the Śiva temple at Pampāpura. It
was Caturdaśī day, and thousands of people had
gathered there, and I stood there looking at the
Śivaliṅga. Then someone cried out, ‘Beat the dog to
death,’ and though, in mortal terror, I ran thrice
about the temple, people beat me to death. Since,
although only by accident, I had run thrice around
the temple, I was born as a King in the present life. I
cherish the greatest devotion for Lord Śiva; but, as
inherent tendencies do not die out so easily I possess
certain characteristics of the dog and that is why I
commit the present cruelties.”
<div n="NI"/>On hearing her husband's past history Kumudvatī
wanted to know about her past also, and Vimarśana
said thus: “In the past life you were a she-dove. Once
you sat on the top of a Pārvatī temple with a piece of
flesh in your beak. Then another dove tried to snatch
it from you, and with it you flew thrice round the
temple. But, the other dove killed you and flew away
with the piece of flesh. Since you flew around the
Pārvatī temple thrice you are now born as a queen.”
Vimarśana told her this also that in the next birth she
would be born as the daughter of King Sṛñjaya, as the
daughter of the King of Kaliṅga in her third rebirth,
as the daughter of the King of Magadha in her fourth
birth, as the daughter of King Daśārṇa in her fifth
birth, as the daughter of Yayāti in her sixth birth, as
the daughter named Vasumatī of the King of Vidarbha
in her seventh birth, and that ultimately she would
attain salvation. Vimarśana in his next birth would
likewise be born as the Sindhu King, as the King of
Saurāṣṭra in his third birth, as the King of Gāndhāra
in his fourth birth, as King of Avantī in his fifth birth,
as King Ānarta in his sixth birth, as King of the
Pāṇḍyas in his seventh birth, and that ultimately he
too would attain salvation. Thus Vimarśana taught his
wife that both of them would ultimately attain salvation
as they had gone round the temple. (Śiva Purāṇa,
Caturdaśīmāhātmya).
<LEND>
