<L>3983<pc>451-b<k1>लवण<k2>लवण<h>II
LAVAṆA II¦. A King who was a grandson of Hariś-
candra. He once conducted a Rājasūya in his
imagination and became a Caṇḍāla. (story in
Jñānavāsiṣṭha). This story was narrated to Śrī Rāma
by Vasiṣṭha to teach him the truth that man does not
realise that this whole universe is an illusion only
because of his ignorance.
[Page452-a+ 64]
Lavaṇa was the King of Uttarapāṇḍava, a country of
great fame. He was the grandson of Hariścandra and
wished to earn fame by performing a Rājasūya yāga
as Hariścandra had done. Lavaṇa decided to perform
the yāga in his mind only. He made grand prepara-
tions for the yajña. He invited the Ṛtviks and after
invoking the devas inflamed the sacrificial fire. For one
year he observed yāga like that and in the end gave
gifts to the brahmins and the poor. It was all an
imaginary performance that the King had in the
course of a single day when he indulged in a reverie.
In the evening as usual he continued his day to day
duties.
<div n="NI"/>One who performs Rājasūya will have to bear woes and
sorrows for a period of twelve years and since Lavaṇa
had performed it mentally, Indra sent his agent to
give Lavaṇa worries mentally. Indra's agent appeared
in the court of King Lavaṇa in the guise of a magician.
The magician bowing before the King with awe said,
“Lord, I shall show you a magic. See it sitting on
your throne. It will be as astounding as if seeing moon
rise on the earth”.
<div n="NI"/>Saying this the magician took a bundle of peacock-
feathers and waved it against the face of the King.
That bundle was capable of producing different
objects and visions. The King fixed his eyes on the
several glittering spots on the feathers and soon he
saw a relative of the Saindhava King approaching the
court. Behind him was a beautiful horse. Holding the
horse by the reins the new-comer addressed the
King thus. “Lord, this horse is as good as Uccaiśśravas
and it has been sent by the King of Sindhu to be
presented to you. Best things should be given to the
best people and only then the value of the thing
would be correctly understood.” The magician who
was standing near-by supported the statement of the
new-comer. He said “Lord, what he says is true. This
horse has wonderful powers. Take a tour of all the
worlds riding on this horse”. The King sat staring at
the horse and he sat thus for an hour and a half. The
entire court was perplexed.
<div n="NI"/>After some time the King awoke from his meditation
and looking at his courtiers in wonder he said thus:
“I shall tell you what happened to me during the
short period I was sitting in meditation. While I was
looking at the peacock feathers of the magician I felt
a desire to go hunting riding on this horse. So I went
to the forest alone riding on this horse. Very quickly
the horse took me a long distance deviating from the
main path and I soon found myself in the dark depths
of a huge forest. By the time we reached that forest
my mind and body were equally tired and still we
went on moving till evening came. Somehow we
crossed the forest and reached Jāṅgala. There I found
a cluster of lemon trees and to ease my body I caught
hold of a creeper hanging from one of the lemon trees.
As I did so, to my horror, I found the horse running
away from me and leaving me alone. Tired by the
day's travel I sat at a place and dozed. Darkness was
creeping in and soon the whole place was in complete
darkness. It was very cold also. Somehow I spent the
night and when morning came, with hopes I walked
around the place. The place was still and no living
thing was in sight. As I roamed about I saw a forest-
[Page452-b+ 65]
girl coming with a pot of rice. I approached her and
asked for some rice. She did not pay any attention to
my request and moved on. I followed her and she
said she would give me rice if I promised to marry
her. In despair I agreed to her condition and she was
pleased with my reply. She gave me half of the rice
and curry she was carrying to her father and also some
lemon-juice to drink. After taking that food I rested
for a while.
<div n="NI"/>Her name was Hārakeyūrī. As soon as her father
came from the fields she told him everything. The
caṇḍāla was immensely pleased to hear about our
marriage and all of us went to their hut. The scene I
saw at the hut was astonishing. At one place was the
flesh of boars, horses, fowl and crows in a heap and on
the intestines of animals hanging from ropes sat birds
pecking at them. In the hands of children there were
pieces of raw meat and flies hovered round them. The
hut presented a disgusting atmosphere and yet I
entered and sat on a leaf and my marriage with
Hārakeyūrī was conducted there. The celebrations of
the marriage lasted for seven days and all these days
people danced and shouted amidst loud noises of
drumming in a hilarious mood of drunkenness.
<div n="NI"/>Eight months passed by very soon and Hārakeyūrī
became pregnant. She delivered a girl first and soon
we had two or three children more. I had to do many
cruel and nasty deeds to feed my family and gradually
I became old. My hair became grey.
<div n="NI"/>At that time there occurred a great famine and those
residing in the forests were put to great trouble. There
was no water to drink as all ponds and lakes went
dry. Some of us migrated to the vicinity of the
Vindhya mountain where there were plenty of water-
fountains. A few committed suicide. We also left the
place and started walking, taking the children also
along with us. After some time we sat under a palm
tree completely exhausted. My wife began to weep
profusely. She then kissed her children and lay down
and started sleeping. Thirsty and hungry my children
lay there awaiting death. Unable to witness the scene
I jumped up from there deciding to commit suicide
myself. Suddenly my vision faded and I was able to
see this court and you all. This is the work of that
magician”.
<div n="NI"/>The courtiers sat dumb-founded at the incredible
story of the King. Suddenly the magician disappeared.
The magician after making the King experience the
woes of twelve years in a very short time left for the
court of Indra.
<div n="NI"/>Next morning King Lavaṇa in the hope of seeing the
place and people of his dream in reality near the
mountain Vindhya started with his retinue on the
false pretext that he was going to conduct a victory
march When he entered a big forest he met with many
familiar places and hunters of his dream. Then he saw
the hut where he had lived. The same men and women
were there all around. Then the saw an old lady
lamenting thus: “Oh my dear sons, where did you go
from my lap? My dear daughter, have you forsaken
me? Oh prince, you came here abandoning all luxury
and the beautiful girls of your palace and married
my daughter. But God did not allow even her to be
your permanent wife. The river of life has to take
worthless and mean paths forced by circumstances. A
[Page453-a+ 65]
very virtuous King had to come and live with a
caṇḍāla girl.”
<div n="NI"/>Hearing this the King went to her and asked her all de-
tails. When she repeated the story the king knew that the
lady was the mother of his caṇḍāla wife. The King and
ministers were surprised to find that his vision was
real and within that short period of his meditation he
had lived a life of years. This perplexed the King.
He then gave the old lady whatever she wanted and
after consoling her started for the palace thinking
about the wonderful happenings and mysteries of life.
<LEND>
