<L>4190<pc>465-a<k1>महीरथ<k2>महीरथ
MAHĪRATHA¦. A King who earned great merit by
observing Vrata in the month of Vaiśākha (May).
This King gave to those in hell his one day's puṇya
and all of them were released from hell.
[Page465-b+ 65]
Mahīratha was a King who became prosperous by
accrued puṇya. Kaśyapa was his guru. The King
entrusted the affairs of the state to his ministers and
led a very immoral life. The country began to decay
day by day and one day Kaśyapa gave Dharmopadeśa
to Mahīratha. The Guru said: “Oh King, your body
which was in a state of sinning has attained a state of
virtue by your association with me. Those well-versed
in the Vedas say that the body is of three different
kinds. Firstly there is the one which is evil-natured
without either virtue or knowledge. Secondly, there is
the virtuous one with good conduct. Thirdly, there is
the agonising body which hides both virtue and evil.
The body without virtue and salvation is always a
body of sins. Your body has now become virtuous
by becoming devotional to your guru and attending to
my words. You are now fit to do virtuous deeds and I
shall now make you enjoy the benefits of Vaiśākhasnāna
(a bath with religious rites in the month of Vaiśākha
(May).
<div n="NI"/>After that Kaśyapa made him take the bath and worship
with proper Vedic rites in the month of Vaiśākha. The
King became old and died. At once the servants of
Kāla (King of Death) came to fetch the soul of
Mahīratha. But angels from Mahāviṣṇu came and
thrusting aside the agents of Kāla took charge of the
soul of Mahīratha. Nymphs from above sang in praise
of the King whose sin had waned because of Vaiśā-
khaprātassnāna (early morning bath in the month of
Vaiśākha). The angels from Viṣṇu carrying the soul
of the King to Svarga took him through hell. The King
heard the agonising cries of those suffering from
different kinds of torture in hell. The King made
enquiries and feeling compassionate requested those in
charge of the hell to release those there in hell then
by accepting a portion of the puṇya acquired by him.
The angels agreed to that and the King gave away the
Puṇya he had acquired during one day by observing
the Vaiśākhavrata. At once all those in hell were
released from the agony and were sent to heaven.
(Vaiśākhamāhātmyaprakaraṇa, Padma Purāṇa, Pātāla-
khaṇḍa).
<LEND>
