<L>4191<pc>465-b<k1>महिष<k2>महिष
MAHIṢA¦. An Asura.
<div n="NI"/>1). {%Birth.%} Long ago there was a famous Asura King
named Danu. Two sons named Rambha and Karam-
bha were born to him. Having no issue, they decided
to worship Mālavaṭa yakṣa, praying to be blessed with
children. They started tapas, Karambha, in the
middle of water and Rambha in the middle of
Pañcāgni. Indra was alarmed at their tapas. He took
the form of a crocodile and went into the water in
which Karambha was standing and caught hold of his
feet, pulling him down. Karambha was drowned. The
mighty Rambha who was enraged at the death of his
brother, decided to cut off his own head and offer it
as sacrifice in the fire. He drew his sword and was
about to cut off his head, when Agni, the god of fire,
appeared before him and stopped him saying:—“Do
not kill yourself. Killing another person itself is a sin.
Suicide is a more serious sin. Ask for any boon you
wish to have; I shall grant it. Do not put an end to
your life.”
<div n="NI"/>Then Rambha replied:— “If you are prepared to
grant me a boon, let me have a son who is more
brilliant than yourself and who will be the conqueror
[Page466-a+ 65]
of all the three worlds. He should not be defeated by
Devas or Asuras, and he should be as mighty as the
wind, handsome and an expert archer.” Agni replied:-
“You will have such a son by the woman who wins
your heart”.
<div n="NI"/>When god Agni had left after saying this, Rambha
went to visit Mālayakṣa, who was attended to by
Yakṣas. There, they had a treasure known as Padma
and numerous animals like elephants, horses, buffaloes,
cows and sheep. Among them was a three-year-old she-
buffalo of exceptional charm and Rambha fell in love
with her. She was also irresistibly attracted by him.
As fate would have it, a sexual union took place
between them.
<div n="NI"/>The she-buffalo became pregnant and Rambha took
her with him to his own house in Pātāla. There, the
other Dānavas, his kinsmen who came to know of his
connection with the she-buffalo, expelled him from
their midst as one who had committed a forbidden act.
So he returned to Mālavaṭayakṣa. The pretty she-
buffalo accompanied her husband to the holy Yakṣa-
maṇḍala.
<div n="NI"/>While they were living there, she gave birth to an
attractive buffalo-calf. After that a he-buffalo came
across her. But she remained loyal to her Dānava
husband who drew his sword and rushed towards
the he-buffalo. The terrible beast with his mighty
horns attacked Rambha who fell dead on the ground.
The widowed Mahiṣī (she-buffalo) sought the protec-
tion of the Yakṣas. They saved her from the Mahiṣa
(He-buffalo). The disappointed and love-stricken
Mahiṣa drowned himself in a holy lake and was reborn
as a mighty and heroic Asura named Namara. The
Mahiṣī spent some time under the protection of the
Yakṣas. When they cremated Rambha's body, she
jumped into the funeral pyre and burnt herself to
death. At once from the middle of the fire there arose
a monstrous being. That terrible monster, armed with
a sword drove away the Yakṣas and killed all the
Mahiṣas. Mahiṣa who was the son of Rambha alone
was spared. He was the Asura named Raktabīja. He
defeated all gods like Indra, Rudra, Sūrya, Vāyu and
others.
<div n="NI"/>Mahiṣāsura became the King of the Asuras. The
alarmed Devas (gods) abandoned their posts of
honour. All the worlds were plunged in darkness.
(Vāmana Purāṇa, Chapter 17).
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Mahiṣāsura's Reign.%} Mahiṣāsura who was intoxi-
cated with pride on account of the boon he had
received, became the undisputed and sole emperor of
the three worlds. He formed a strong council of
Ministers. Cikṣura who was puffed with pride and an
expert in military Science, was installed as War-
Minister and Tāmra, the gifted economist as Finance
Minister. The Prime Minister was Asilomā. Biḍāla
was Foreign Minister. Udarka became Military
Commander. Bāṣkala, Trinetra and Kālabandhaka
were assigned the posts of Members of the Executive
Council. Śukrācārya was the Education Minister.
Mahiṣa strengthened his army. The State Treasury
overflowed with wealth. Kings of the neighbouring
states paid tribute and bowed their heads to him. The
Brāhmaṇas offered the share of yajña to Mahiṣāsura
and prostrated before him. (Devī Bhāgavata, 5th
Skandha).
[Page466-b+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Outbreak of War.%} After strengthening his position
as Emperor of the world, Mahiṣa contemplated the
conquest of Heaven. He sent a messenger to Indra.
The messenger ordered Indra to surrender to Mahiṣā-
sura. Indra answered with utter contempt to the
messenger and his master Mahiṣa. The messenger
returned and reported the matter to Mahiṣāsura who
began to tremble with anger.
<div n="NI"/>Although Indra sent away the messenger with scorn,
he had no peace of mind. He called together the
Devas and discussed what was to be done. They decid-
ed to declare war on Mahiṣāsura. Brahmā and Indra,
accompanied by the other Devas set out to Kailāsa.
From there, taking Paramaśiva with them, they
proceeded to Vaikuṇṭha. On arrival there, they offered
prayers to Mahāviṣṇu who appeared before them.
They submitted to him their grievances and sufferings
under the rule of Mahiṣāsura. After deep deliberations,
Mahāviṣṇu supported the proposal for war. Thus the
war between Devas and Asuras started.
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Devāsura Yuddha.%} It was a dreadful war. Mahiṣa
himself appeared on the scene of battle. He struck at
Indra with his mighty club. Before he received the
blow, Indra broke the club with his Thunderbolt. The
Asura named Andhaka encountered Mahāviṣṇu. The
five arrows of that Asura were broken to pieces by
Mahāviṣṇu in the sky itself. Then they started a
terrible fight with various weapons such as sword,
spear, axe, arrow, discus etc. It lasted for about 50
days without a break. Bāṣkala fought against Indra,
Mahiṣa against Rudra, Trinetra against Yamadharma,
Mahāhanu against Śrīda, and Asilomā against Pracetas.
In the course of the battle, Andhaka, struck a blow at
Garuḍa with his cudgel. Garuḍa, the vehicle of Viṣṇu
was stunned by the blow, but Viṣṇu restored his energy
by stroking him gently with his right hand. After that
he took up his bow Śārṅga and tried to kill Andhaka
with a shower of arrows. But the Daitya warrior
countered all of them with 50 arrows which he shot at
Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu smashed all of them and sent his
destructive weapon “Sudarśana Cakra” against
Andhaka. Without the slightest fear, Andhaka stopped
it with his own Cakra weapon and kept Viṣṇu's
weapon at bay and shouted in triumph. Finding that
Viṣṇu's weapon had failed and hearing the scornful
shout of Andhaka, the Devas were filled with panic.
At this critical moment, Viṣṇu took up his club
“Kaumodakī” and rushed into the midst of the Asuras
and struck Andhaka with it. Under the blow, the
Asura hero reeled and fell down unconscious. At his
fall, Mahiṣa himself rushed forward to Viṣṇu with a
terrible roar. Then there ensued a bitter fight between
Viṣṇu and Mahiṣa. Each began a shower of arrows
on the other. But not a single arrow injured either.
In the thick of the battle Viṣṇu struck a blow on
Mahiṣa's head and he dropped down unconscious.
But ere long the Dānava rose up and taking up his iron
pestle aimed a mighty blow at Viṣṇu's head and
brought it down with deadly effect Under the blow,
even Viṣṇu fell unconscious on Garuḍa's back. Viṣṇu's
condition made Garuḍa withdraw from the scene of
battle temporarily, with Viṣṇu on his back. Indra and
the other gods began to cry aloud. Śiva, who saw this
desperate plight of the Devas, at once came to the
battlefield, carrying his trident, ready to fight against
[Page467-a+ 65]
Mahiṣa. When he tried to pierce the Asura's chest
with his trident, the latter thwarted the blow with his
own lance and aimed it at Śiva's breast. Although it
actually hit him, Śiva disregarded it and gave another
thrust to Mahiṣa with his trident. By this time Mahā-
viṣṇu had recovered from his swoon. At once he return-
ed to the field of battle and joined Śiva in his attack on
Mahiṣa. When Mahiṣa saw that both Śiva and Viṣṇu
were launching a combined attack against him, in his
wild fury he assumed his own buffalo form and lifting
up his tail and shaking his head rushed towards his
mighty adversaries. With his terrible horns he lifted
up mountain peaks and hurled them at the enemy.
But the Deva leaders stopped them with their shower
of arrows. Viṣṇu sent his Cakra against him and it
made the Asura chief drop down senseless. But he
soon recovered and rushed forward to renew his attack
with a terrible roar. Viṣṇu then sounded his divine
conch “Pāñcajanya” and drowned the sound of his
roar. Just as the roaring of the asura frightened the
Devas, the sound of Pāñcajanya struck terror in the
minds of the Asuras.
<div n="NI"/>5) {%Mahiṣa's Death.%} The Asuras were terrified at the
sound of Pāñcajanya. In order to encourage them,
Mahiṣa assumed the form of a lion and rushed into
the midst of the army of Devas roaring. Even the
Trimūrtis were alarmed for a short while when they
saw the fierce beast advancing through their battle-
array killing and mauling hundreds of the Devas on
either side. Mahāviṣṇu at once sent his weapon Cakra
against the lion. The lion was reduced to ashes by it,
but Mahiṣa rose up again in the form of a buffalo and
rushed forward. He gave a severe cut on Mahāviṣṇu's
chest with his long and powerful horn. Mahāviṣṇu
started fleeing to Vaikuṇṭha. At the sight of this, Śiva
concluded that Mahiṣa was proof against killing and
so he also fled to Kailāsa riding on his bull. When
Viṣṇu and Śiva took to their heels, Brahmā also flew to
Satyaloka, riding on this swan. Although the leaders
left the field, the rest of the Devas under the leadership
of Indra, encountered Mahiṣa again. Indra drew his
Vajra. The Aṣṭadikpālakas assisted him. The battle
raged fiercely again. The Devas began to flee for life.
Taking this opportunity, Mahiṣāsura forced his way
into Heaven. He planted his Daitya flag highly. He
drove out all the remaining Devas. In this way the
Asuras took possession of Devaloka. The Devas took
shelter on the tops of mountains.
<div n="NI"/>Several centuries passed. The Devas assembled and
prayed to Brahmā. He took them again to Vaikuṇṭha.
Śiva also arrived there. The Devas submitted their
grievances to Viṣṇu. They prayed to him to devise
some method by which Mahiṣa could be killed.
Brahmā had given him a boon that no Man was
capable of killing him.
<div n="NI"/>Mahāviṣṇu said to them:—“By Virtue of the boon,
Mahiṣa could be killed only by a woman. If we can
create a woman who is part of the Devas with their
power and glory, we could kill him with her help. So
let us try to create such a mighty woman, concentrating
all our powers on her. After her creation, we must
give her all our weapons.”
<div n="NI"/>As soon as Mahāviṣṇu spoke these words, a figure with
dazzling effulgence issued forth from Brahmā's face.
Both Viṣṇu and Śiva were amazed at the sight of this
[Page467-b+ 64]
figure radiating beams of light which were partly cool
and partly warm. Similar figures, embodying the
peculiar powers and qualities of Viṣṇu, Śiva, Indra,
Kubera, Varuṇa and all other gods, emanated from
them. In a moment all these figures merged into a
single figure and transformed themselves into a single
woman with celestial beauty and having eighteen arms.
This woman of exquisite beauty combining all the
powers and glories of all the Devas was Devī herself.
The devas supplied her with jewels and ornaments and
gorgeous clothes. Decked in all glory and with fasci-
nating beauty, riding on a lion. she took her stand at
the entrance of Devaloka and challenged Mahiṣa. At
the very first sight of Devī, Mahiṣa fell in love with
her. She declared she would become the wife of the
person who could defeat her in battle.
<div n="NI"/>So Mahiṣa made up his mind to defeat her in a fight.
It was a terrible battle. All the Ministers of Mahiṣa,
like Bāṣkala, Durmukha, Tāmra, Cikṣura, Asilomā
and Biḍāla were slain. At last Mahiṣa himself appeared
on the scene to fight with Devī. Mahiṣa started with
a shower of arrows and Devī countered them all with
her own arrows. In the end she attacked him with
Viṣṇu Cakra. The Cakra cut off his throat and he
dropped down dead. The devas raised a thunderous
shout of joy and triumph. (Devī Bhāgavata, 5th
Skandha).
<LEND>
