<L>4220<pc>469-a<k1>मैत्रावरुण<k2>मैत्रावरुण
MAITRĀVARUṆA¦. Another name for Vasiṣṭha.
Agastya also is known by this name. Because they were
born as the sons of Mitra and Varuṇa they got this
name. How they came to be reborn as the sons of
Mitrāvaruṇas is told in Devī Bhāgavata.
<div n="NI"/>There was once a celebrated emperor named Nimi in
the Ikṣvāku line of Kings. Nimi was the twelfth son
of Ikṣvāku. The agrahāra found near the āśrama of
Gautama Maharṣi, called Jayantapura was constructed
by Nimi. Once Nimi decided to perform a big yāga
and after taking the consent of his father made pre-
parations for the same. He invited such great sages
as Bhṛgu, Aṅgiras, Vāmadeva, Pulastya, Pulaha and
Ṛcīka. He then went to their family preceptor Vasiṣṭha
and requested him to be the chief priest. But Vasiṣṭha
had already promised Indra to conduct a yāga for him
and so advised Nimi to postpone his yāga to a later
date. But Nimi was unwilling to postpone his yāga and
so he performed it with Gautama Maharṣi as the
chief priest. It took five hundred years for Nimi to
complete the yāga. After five hundred years Vasiṣṭha
after completing the yāga of Indra came to see Nimi
and found that he had already conducted the yāga
without him. Vasiṣṭha was angry and he cursed Nimi
saying that Nimi would become bodiless. But powerful
Nimi cursed Vasiṣṭha also and separated his soul from
his body.
<div n="NI"/>Griefstricken, Vasiṣṭha went to Brahmā and com-
plained to him. Brahmā said, “Oh son, you go and
merge with the brilliance of Mitrāvaruṇas and stay
there. After some time you will be able to be born
without being in a womb; you will then have a memory
of the past and you will be very learned and will be
worshipped by all”.
<div n="NI"/>Vasiṣṭha was pleased to hear that and he circumam-
bulated Brahmā and prostrated before him and then
went to the āśrama of Mitrāvaruṇas. He then
abandoned his body there and merged with the
brilliance of Mitrāvaruṇas. One day Urvaśī with
her companions came to the āśrama of Mitrāvaruṇas
and attracted by her charm they spent a night with
her. Their semen at one time fell into a jar nearby
and from it were born two people, Agastya and
Vasiṣṭha, (Skandha 6, Devī Bhāgavata).
<LEND>
