<L>4226<pc>469-b<k1>मकरदंष्ट्रा<k2>मकरदंष्ट्रा
MAKARADAṂṢṬRĀ¦. A prostitute of Mathurā, the birth
place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The story of this woman who had
made prostitution and cheating her aim in life was told
to Vāsavadattā wife of Udayana by Vasantaka. The
curbing of the arrogance of Makaradaṃṣṭrā by a poor
brahmin of name Lohajaṅgha with the help of Vibhīṣaṇa,
emperor of the demons, is the theme of the story.
<div n="NI"/>Makaradaṃṣṭrā had a daughter named Rūpiṇikā.
The mother tried to make the daughter also a prostitute.
Once Rūpiṇikā went to a far-off temple for worship as
instructed by her mother. There she met a poor brahmin
named Lohajaṅgha and Rūpiṇikā was attracted to
him by his handsome features. She sent word through
her maid requesting Lohajaṅgha to come to her house.
Rūpiṇikā came back and waited for her lover to come.
After some time Lohajaṅgha came. Makaradaṃṣṭrā
scrutinised the new-comer with suspicion but Rūpiṇikā
took him to her bed-room. Both of them remained
there making love. Makaradaṃṣṭrā finding her daugh-
ter going against the principles of a prostitute called her
to her side and said: “Dear daughter, why do you keep
this poor brahmin? Is this the duty of a prostitute?
Love and prostitution never go together. We are like
dusk. The twilight of love remains for a few seconds
only. So do send away this brahmin who has no
money.”
<div n="NI"/>Rūpiṇikā discarded the advice of her mother and
Makaradaṃṣṭrā felt annoyed. She decided to send out
Lohajaṅgha somehow. One day a prince came that
way and Makaradaṃṣṭrā enticed him to her house and
requested the prince to accept Rūpiṇikā and send
Lohajaṅgha out of her house.
<div n="NI"/>The prince accepted the request of the mother-prosti-
tute. At that time Rūpiṇikā had gone to the temple
[Page470-a+ 65]
and Lohajaṅgha for a walk. After some time Lohajaṅgha
came as usual and entered the house. and Makara-
daṃṣṭrā introduced Lohajaṅgha to the prince. At once
the servants of the prince beat Lohajaṅgha and carrying
him away out of the house put him in an excrement pit.
Lohajaṅgha somehow escaped from there and ran away.
He was sorry to part with his love and he went on a
pilgrimage. He walked for a long distance in the hot
sun and feeling tired searched for a shady place to take
some rest. Then he saw the carcass of an elephant.
Jackals entering through the buttocks had eaten all
flesh and the animal lay hollow inside with the skin in
tact on the skeleton. Lohajaṅgha entered the inside
of the elephant and slept there. That night it rained
heavily and the hole at the buttocks contracted with
little space for Lohajaṅgha to get out. The rains continu-
ed, the water-level in the river Gaṅgā rose and soon
the carcass of the elephant was carried away to the
river and it gradually reached the ocean. At that time
a great kite taking it to be flesh for food drew it up and
took it to the other side of the ocean. When it pecked
it open it found a man inside and frightened
left it there and flew away. By this time Lohajaṅgha
awoke from his slumber and while he was looking
around him in surprise he saw two demons approaching
him. The demons thought he had come to the place
crossing the ocean like Śrī Rāma to bring disaster
to them and so they immediately ran up to Vibhīṣaṇa
and told him of the incident. Vibhīṣaṇa asked his ser-
vants to bring Lohajaṅgha before him and when he
was brought before him enquired very politely who he
was and why he had come there and how he had come.
In reply to the enquiries Lohajaṅgha said thus: “I am
a brahmin from Mathurā. I did penance to please
Viṣṇu to get relief from my poverty and one day Viṣṇu
appeared before me in person and said, ‘Go to my
devotee Vibhīṣaṇa, and he will give you enough wealth
to live happily’. It was in a dream and when I awoke
I found myself on this shore. I do not know how it all
happened.”
<div n="NI"/>Vibḥīṣaṇa was immensely pleased to hear the story of
Lohajaṅgha and gave him immense wealth including
many precious diamonds, golden replica of the emblem
of Viṣṇu consisting of Śaṅkha, Cakra, Gadā and
Padma and a small kite from the mountain of Svarṇa-
mūla. Accepting all these Lohajaṅgha flew on the back of
the kite back to Mathurā and alighted at a deserted place
there. Keeping all his valuable articles in a secret place
he took one diamond and selling it acquired some cash
and with that purchased some ornamental dress for
himself. At dusk he dressed himself and holding the
emblem of Viṣṇu flew on the back of the kite to the
house of Rūpiṇikā and addressing Rūpiṇikā in private
said, “I am Viṣṇu. I have come to you for a
union because you are virtuous”. Hearing that Rūpiṇikā
respectfully surrendered herself to him. Before dawn
Lohajaṅgha left the house and flew back to the desert-
ed place. Rūpiṇikā felt herself to be a goddess and
did not speak to anybody in the morning. The mother
was perplexed to find her daughter observing a vow of
silence and questioned her. Rūpiṇikā then told her
mother all that had happened on the previous night.
Makaradaṃṣṭrā wanted to confirm the story of her
daughter and so she kept awake that night to see what
took place. She found Lohajaṅgha arriving as Viṣṇu
[Page470-b+ 65]
on the back of Garuḍa and fully believing him to be
Mahāviṣṇu was overjoyed at the fortune of her daughter
and running to her the next morning said “Oh,
dear daughter, by the grace of Śrī Nārāyaṇa you
have become a goddess. How fortunate am I? You
should do one thing for me. You must send me to
heaven with this body of mine along with your husband-
god.”
<div n="NI"/>Rūpiṇikā agreed to do so. That night she told the fake
Viṣṇu the desire of her mother. Then Lohajaṅgha said:
“Your mother who is a great sinner is not eligible to go
to Svarga in her present state. Day after tomorrow
on the Dvādaśī day the gates of heaven will open.
Early morning on that day the goblins of Śiva would
enter Svarga. I shall then try to send your mother
along with them. But your mother should then appear
as a goblin. The hair on the head should be shaved at
five places and the remaining hair locked to form five
tufts of hair. She should wear a garland of bones and
the body should be painted black on one side with char-
coal and red on the other side with saffron. The painting
should be in oil and she should not wear any clothes.
This would make her appear like a goblin of Maheśvara
(Śiva) and then there will be no difficulty for me to allow
her to enter Svarga.
<div n="NI"/>Lohajaṅgha left the place early in the morning and
Rūpiṇikā told her mother all that her husband told
her. Makaradaṃṣṭrā dressed herself as instructed by
Lohajaṅgha and awaited the arrival of the fake Mahā-
viṣṇu. Lohajaṅgha came at night and Rūpiṇikā
showed him her mother dressed as desired by her
husband. Lohajaṅgha took Makaradaṃṣṭrā on the
back of his kite and flew up. As he rose high he saw a
tall flagstaff of a temple nearby. It had a wheel on its
top. Lohajaṅgha placed her on the wheel and said,
“Do sit here for a while. I shall soon come back to
you and bless you”. To the people assembled in
the temple he spoke from the air, “Citizens, today the
goddess ‘Mārī’, destroyer of everything, will fall on
you. If you want to avoid that, remain in this
temple and worship Viṣṇu”.
<div n="NI"/>People were frightened when they heard the warning
from air and all remained in the temple chanting pra-
yers and reciting devotional songs about Viṣṇu. Makara-
daṃṣṭrā sat there for a while dreaming about the hap-
piness in store for her in Svarga and awaiting her
daughter's husband to come and take her. But Loha-
jaṅgha had come to the temple in an ordinary dress
and was with the crowd in the temple. Time dragged
on and it became midnight and Makaradaṃṣṭrā sitting
on the wheel of the flagstaff felt uneasy. She could not
sit there any longer and she cried aloud, “Oh, I am fal-
ling”. People mistook her for Mārī and cried back, “Oh,
goddess, do not fall”. It became morning and in the
sunlight they saw a figure sitting on the top of the flag-
staff and were surprised. The King was informed and he
came to the temple and so also all people from the place.
When the people on scrutinising the figure knew it was
Makaradaṃṣṭrā, they all clapped their hands laughing
loudly. Hearing the news Rūpiṇikā also came to the
temple and she somehow got her mother down from the
flagstaff. The King then made the prostitute tell her story
and when it was finished he declared thus: “Who has
thus played fraud on this prostitute who had throughout
her life cheated other people? If he comes before me
[Page471-a+ 64]
now I will give him my crown and Kingdom”. Hearing
that Lohajaṅgha appeared before the King and con-
fessed that he had done the mischief. He then narrated
his story to the king and placed before the king the
golden Seal of Visnu's emblem which Vibhīṣaṇa had
given him. The king as per his promise gave Loha-
jaṅgha his kingdom and Rūpiṇikā once more became
his. The arrogance of Makaradaṃṣṭṛā was thus curbed.
(Kathāmukhalambaka, Kathāsaritsāgara).
<LEND>
