<L>4265<pc>473-a<k1>मामाङ्कम्<k2>मामाङ्कम्
MĀMĀṄKAM¦. Māmāṅkam was a very important national
festival of Kerala. This festival used to be conducted on
the sandy beach of Tirunāvāya. It represented the crown-
ing ceremony of the sovereign of Kerala. There used to
be a grand assembly of all the artistes of Kerala. There
was an exhibition of the arts, trade and commerce of
the land attracting a huge crowd of people from differ-
ent parts of Bhārata. Scholars believe that the word
Māmāṅkam is derived from the Sanskrit word “Mahā-
[Page473-b+ 65]
maghā”. Some say that it was so called because it was
conducted on the day of Maghā in the month of
Māgha.
<div n="NI"/>The festival was conducted under the auspices of the
supreme power in Malabar. For a long period Peru-
māls were in power in Malabar and so Māmāṅkam was
conducted under the control of the Perumāls. The last
of the line of Perumāls handed over the right to the
then mighty chief, the King of Valluvanāḍ and for
several years Māmāṅkam was conducted under his aus-
pices. The foreign traders who came to Malabar, the
Mohammadans and the Portuguese, persuaded Sāmūtiri
(zamorin) to take control of this festival and with the
help of the foreigners Sāmūtiri wrested from the King
of Valluvanāḍ the right of conducting the Māmāṅkam.
After some time the King. of Valluvanāḍ made an
attempt to get back the right from Sāmūtiri. This
enraged Sāmūtiri and there ensued a fight between
them resulting in much shedding of blood. An agree-
ment was reached that after twelve years each would
relinquish the right in favour of the other. So after
twelve years Sāmūtiri was compelled to relinquish his
right but by resorting to many sly tactics he retained
the right. The strength of Sāmūtiri increased and he
became a great power in Malabar. He was bold enough
to send away the Portuguese from the coast and
Sāmūtiri maintained his position till the advent of
Tippu Sultan to Malabar in the year 1788 A.D. Every
twelve years Sāmūtiri had to show his might to retain
the right of the Māmāṅkam and those days of exhibit-
ing strength were ghastly.
<div n="NI"/>The place of this Māmāṅkam was at Tirunāvāya in Tirūr
taluk. A Śiva temple of historic fame stands on the
shores of the river Bhārata flowing through Tirūr taluk.
<div n="NI"/>There was an expansive sand beach on its shores,
become famous by being the scene of many socio-politi-
cal events there. It was the venue of the mighty
Nambūdiris of Malabar to discuss matters of socio-
political importance. Every year on the full-moon day
in the month of Māgha all the ruling chiefs of Kerala
would assemble there and on a special dais there
Sāmūtiri would sit with royal robes and a sword in his
right hand presiding over the assembly. The sword was
given to the Sāmūtiris by Ceramān Perumāl and was
considered the symbol of undisputed sovereignty of
Kerala. It was also a sanction to conduct the Māmāṅ-
kam. The Sāmūtiris came prepared to give a fight if their
authority was challenged by anybody. The ruling
Sāmūtiri would send an invitation to all chiefs of
Kerala. On either side of Sāmūtiri would sit the rela-
tives and friends of Sāmūtiri. There would be an army
of Nairs and Tiyyas ready outside and only after
defeating them could anybody approach the dais of
Sāmūtiri. The dais was called Nilapāṭṭutara.
<div n="NI"/>The whole atmosphere would resound with drummings
and shots from pop-guns. Majestic elephants adorned
with golden headdresses would be arrayed there. The
conference of the chiefs would last for twelve days and
the festival for twentyfour days. The Māmāṅkam attract-
ed a huge crowd from far and wide because there were
then many items of interest and information. The
Māmāṅkam commenced on a fixed day at an auspicious
hour in the morning when the caparisoned elephants
started moving to the accompaniment of drums and
pipes. The last Māmāṅkam was in 1755 A.D. By the
[Page474-a+ 64]
time of Mārttaṇḍa Varmā the centre of power shifted
from Malabar to the south. Even today the memories
of the same are brightening spots in the history of
Malabar.
<LEND>
