<L>4329<pc>478-b<k1>माणिक्यवाचकर्<k2>माणिक्यवाचकर्
MĀṆIKYAVĀCAKAR¦ (MĀṆIKKA-VĀŚAHAR). A de-
votee and poet who lived in Tamilnāḍu. He is believed
to have lived during the period between the eighth and
ninth centuries A.D. He was born in Tiruvādavūr in
an Ādiśaiva brahmin family. Tiruvādavūr was a village
near Madura, the capital of Pāṇḍya kingdom. His
father was Śambhupādāśrita and mother Śivajñānavatī.
The name given by his parents to Māṇikyavācakar is
still unknown. Because he was born in Tiruvādavūr
everybody called him Tiruvādavūrār. He became a
scholar in his sixteenth year. The Pāṇḍya king called
him to his palace and appointed him as his minister.
He gave him the honour of the title ‘Tennavar Brahma-
rāyar’. Māṇikyavācakar showed more interest in devo-
tional matters than in matters of the state.
<div n="NI"/>Once when the King was holding his durbar he got in-
formation that in one of the eastern ports had landed a
set of good war-horses for sale. He sent Tiruvādavūrār
to that place. The minister, when near the port of
Tirupperundurai, heard a sound of Vedic utterances and
he immediately went to the place from where the sound
came. He saw Lord Śiva sitting under a tree in the guise
of a Guru. Forgetting all state affairs he became engross-
ed in the meditation of Śiva. Suddenly he developed
a talent for poetry and music and sweet attract-
ive poems in praise of Śiva started flowing
from his tongue. Śiva was immensely pleased and gave
him the name Māṇikyavācakar meaning that every
Vācaka (sentence) coming out of his tongue was equal
in value to a māṇikya (Ruby). The guru gave him a
ruby too. Māṇikyavācakar in the garb of a mendicant
joined a troop of Śiva devotees and spent all the money
he had for the service of the devotees of Śiva and also
for the reconstruction of a dilapidated Śiva temple in
Tirupperundurai.
<div n="NI"/>Māṇikyavācakar reached Madura and informed the
King that the horses would arrive at the palace on the
day Āvaṇi-mūla (Mūla star in the month of Śrāvaṇa)
and presented the king with the ruby which his Guru
had given him. The king was not satisfied and he im-
prisoned him. On the Āvaṇi-mūla day at the stipulat-
ed time the horses arrived at the palace. The horses
were led by strange foreigners. It was Śrī Parameśvara
himself who had come as the chief of the horsemen.
Māṇikyavācakar was released from jail and he also came
to see the horses. The King gave the leader of the troopers
a silk shawl as present. The head of the troopers received
it by the end of his whip. The King resented this but the
[Page479-a+ 64]
troopers went back without any trouble. The horses
were put in stables and Māṇikyavācakar went to his
āśrama.
<div n="NI"/>At midnight all the new horses in the stables turned in-
to jackals and roamed about in the streets howling
loudly and disturbing everyone. After some time they
all disappeared. The anger of the king knew no bounds.
He imprisoned Māṇikyavācakar again. The servants
of the king took him to river Vaigai. That day there
was an unusual flood in the river and the city of
Madura was submerged in waters. The king then realis-
ed his mistake and begged pardon of Māṇikyavācakar.
Māṇikyavācakar asked the king to repair the dam in
the Vaigai. The king assented to the proposal but to
save money the work was entrusted to the citizens of
Madura.
<div n="NI"/>At that time there was an old woman in Madura called
Vantī. She earned her livelihood by selling sweetmeats.
The servants of the king ordered her also to join the
work of the dam. She prayed to Paramaśiva and
then a young man came to the old woman and offered
to work for her in her stead. The young man representing
Vantī went to Vaigai and started to work for her. When
the king came to inspect the work he found the young
man not doing his work satisfactorily and struck him
on his back with a whip. A basketful of sand the young
man was carrying fell down and the work of the dam
was instantly completed. Not only that; all the persons
including the king felt as though they were struck.
Vantī attained Svarga and Māṇikyavācakar went to
Cidambaram. The king repented.
<div n="NI"/>Māṇikyavācakar saw Śiva in person several times. Many
wonderful events happened at the Cidambaram temple
after the arrival of Māṇikyavācakar there. The King
of Laṅkā hearing about the greatness of Māṇikyavācakar
brought his dumb daughter to him and she gained the
power of speech. The Buddhist saints of Laṅkā came
to Māṇikyavācakar and entered into philosophical
discourse with him. They became dumb. The king of
Laṅkā and his followers became devotees of Śiva.
<div n="NI"/>Māṇikyavācakar sat in his āśrama and composed divine
songs. Once Śiva in the guise of a brahmin came there
and copied the songs written by him. Even while he
was reciting his divine songs to the devotees his soul
left his body and merged with that of Śiva.
<div n="NI"/>The divine songs in praise of Śiva by Māṇikyavācakar
constitute the eighth Khaṇḍa of Śaivite hymns by name
“Tirumurai”. They include “Tiruvācakam” and
“Tirukkovaiyār”. The Tiruvācakam contains 654 verses
in 51 hymns and the Tirukkovaiyār contains 400 verses.
All these are songs in praise of Śiva sung on different
occasions. (Divyacaritam).
<LEND>
