<L>4421<pc>489-b<k1>मरुत्<k2>मरुत्
MARUTS¦. In the Purāṇas there are references to 49
gods who are known as “Maruts”. All of them are
the sons of Kaśyapa. The story of how the child in
[Page490-a+ 65]
Diti's womb was cut into 49 pieces which became 49
Maruts. is given in Chapter 71 of Vāmana Purāṇa as
follows:
<div n="NI"/>Kaśyapa's first wife Aditi became the mother of Devas
and his second wife Diti became the mother of Daityas.
The chief of the Devas was Indra and the chiefs of
Daityas were Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu. At the
request of Indra, Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu were
slain by Mahāviṣṇu. Diti who was grieved at the death
of her sons, approached Kaśyapa and requested him
to give her a son who would be strong enough to kill
Indra. Kaśyapa told her that if she could perform
tapas for 10,000 Divyavarṣas with due observances,
she would get a son who would be able to kill Indra
and conquer the three worlds. He gave her a long list
of conditions to be observed during the tapas, some of
which were as follows:—Do not injure any creature;
do not curse; do not tell lies; do not cut nails or hair;
do not touch any unclean object; do not get angry, do
not speak to wicked people; do not wear soiled clothes;
do not wear garlands used by others; do not eat what
is left over by another; do not eat meat touched by a
Śūdra woman. Putting on clean, white dress, carrying
auspicious substances, everyday before breakfast, cows,
Brāhmaṇas, goddess Lakṣmī and Kaśyapa himself
should be worshipped.” This observance is known as
“Puṃsavana.” He said that if she performed the tapas
with this austere observance, a son capable of killing
Indra would be born to her.
<div n="NI"/>Diti started the observance as advised by her husband.
Kaśyapa left for Udaya mountain. After his departure,
Indra came to the Āśrama and pretending friendship
offered to serve Diti as an attendant. Diti accepted his
offer and allowed him to serve her. One day Diti who
was utterly tired fell asleep and Indra took advantage
of this opportunity and gained entrance into her womb
through her nostrils. He cut the child in Diti's womb
with his weapon Vajra into seven pieces. At that time
the child cried aloud and Indra said to it “Mā ruda”
which means “Do not cry”. He cut each of the seven
pieces again into seven pieces and thus 49 Maruts were
born out of the 49 pieces. Since Indra said “Mā ruda”,
they came to be known as “Maruts”. All these
Maruts subsequently became Indra's servants.
<div n="NI"/>After this, Indra with his weapon came out of Diti's
body. With joined palms he begged Diti's pardon and
explained to her that he destroyed the child in her
womb since he was destined to be his (Indra's) enemy.
<LEND>
