<L>4478<pc>496-b<k1>मायाशिव<k2>मायाशिव
MĀYĀŚIVA¦. Padma Purāṇa gives a story of how once an
asura named Jalandhara approached Pārvatī as Śiva to
induce her to surrender to his desires. This Śiva was
called Māyāśiva.
<div n="NI"/>A great battle between the devas and asuras was going
on. The asuras were winning and the devas got frighten-
ed at the strength of the asuras and so Śiva himself
entered the battlefield. Jalandhara who led the army of
[Page497-a+ 65]
the asuras found the fight against Śiva very tough and
smelt defeat. He decided to cheat Pārvatī, the consort
of Śiva, to compensate for his defeat in the battle-field
and so making an asura named Śumbha as the chief,
he left for Kailāsa. Śumbha became a māyā Jalandhara
and continued the fight.
<div n="NI"/>Taking another asura named Durvāraṇa, Jalandhara
went to a cave in Kailāsa and there changed himself
into an exact replica of Śiva. He made Durvāraṇa look
like Nandikeśa.
<div n="NI"/>Then they went to the top of the mountain where Pār-
vatī and her companions were staying. Śiva approached
Pārvatī on the shoulders of Nandikeśa with wounds all
over his body and blood oozing from them. Pārvatī
seeing Śiva thus, with tears rolling down her cheeks
asked him, “Oh, Lord of the gods what happened to
your lordship? Who defeated you in the battle? Why
do you weep like a low-bred man?” Māyāśiva took
from his body all his ornaments like Vāsuki and gave
them to the companions of Pārvatī. When Pārvatī saw
the heads of Gaṇapati and Subrahmaṇya in the hands
of her husband she cried in bitterness. Śiva told her
that all his pārṣadas like Maṇibhadra, Vīrabhadra,
Puṣpadanta, Damana, Dhūmatāmra and Kūṣmāṇḍa
were killed in the battle. Caṇḍī, Bhṛṅgī, Kirīṭī, Mahā-
kāla, Śṛṅkhalī, Caṇḍīśa and Guptanetra were all killed.
Māyāśiva told her that he had picked up the heads of
Gaṇapati and Subrahmaṇya found lying in the battle-
field. He requested Pārvatī to console him by embracing
him. Pārvatī resented the request. She said, “What
you say is unfit for the situation. Sexual enjoyment is
forbidden in times of misery, fear, meditation, vomiting
fever, performing offering to the manes, journey, royal
visits, marriage festivities and in the presence of elders
and teachers. Why do you make this request to me
when I am mourning the death of my sons?
<div n="NI"/>Pretending to be grief-stricken Māyāśiva said “She who
does not give sexual pleasure to a man in distress would
go to hell. I have no pārṣadas now. I have lost my
sons also. I lost my house. Now you also hate me. I am
going to my cave. Let me end my life there. Come
on, Nandikeśa, Vajra, we will go.
Hearing this Pārvatī went near him.
<div n="NI"/>At this time there happened a few bad omens in the
ocean of milk where Viṣṇu was residing, and calling
Garuḍa to his side Viṣṇu asked him to go and enquire
about the battle that was going on between the devas and
asuras. To prevent him from being deceived by the magic
of the asuras Viṣṇu dropped into the mouth of Garuḍa
a pill of great potency. Garuḍa reached the battlefield
very soon but could not find anything out of the way
and so flew to Kailāsa. He did not see Pārvatī first but
hearing a noise from somewhere else peeped in and
saw Māyāśiva. Garuḍa could understand him because of
the power of the pill and so flew swiftly back to Mahā-
viṣṇu and told him what he saw.
<div n="NI"/>Mahāviṣṇu knew that Pārvatī had been deceived by
Jalandhara. So he decided to cheat Vṛndā, wife of
Jalandhara. Mahāviṣṇu filled with amorous desires,
avoiding Mahālakṣmī, covering his head with a
yellow scarf and taking the figure of another person by
his yogic powers stepped out of his abode taking Ananta
for his company. He went to Durgākānana the abode
of Vṛndā. They constructed an āśrama there and the
wild animals like the lion, tiger, boar, bear and monkey
[Page497-b+ 64]
became their disciples taking human form. Then Viṣṇu
created mental agony in Vṛndā to attract her to his
āśrama. Vṛndā started getting hot and her maids
fanned her continuously and anointed her with sandal-
wood paste. She thought of her husband in the battle-
field and often fainted. She had a very bad dream. She
saw her husband Jalandhara lying wounded on his
head, ears and nose, with his body smeared with ashes
and his eyes pecked by vultures. She saw Kālī, with her
hair lying lose, her face reddened with blood, with a
skull in her hand dancing before the body of her hus-
band before starting to eat it. At this moment she was
awakened by the music of the Māgadhas and loud
chanting of family praises by Kimpuruṣas. She at once
stopped the music and prayers and paid them off. Then
she sent word for pandits to explain the dream she saw.
The Pandits said “Devī, this appears to be a dream
giving unimaginable fear. To calm the fear give as gifts
to brahmins, diamonds, garments, cows and elephants.”
Then the brahmin pandits sprinkled on her, water made
potent by mantras. There was no waning of the fever.
Dismissing the pandits, queen Vṛndā went and sat
alone upstairs. She felt the whole palace burning and
by the craft employed by Viṣṇu she found living inside
the palace unbearable.
<div n="NI"/>She got out of the palace and boarding a chariot drawn
by mares she went to her play-garden. The sight of
the garden filled with beautiful flowers and celestial
maidens where no one else but pleasing breeze could
enter made her remember her husband. She then
brooded on how to find out Jalandhara, and there also
she did not get peace of mind. So she accompanied
by her maids started for another garden. That garden
gave a ghastly sight with huge trees standing crowded
interspersed with black rocks and the place resounding
with the roars of lions and tigers. Vṛndā got frightened
and she hastened to say “Smaradūtī, I feel frightened.
Please drive back the chariot home.”
<div n="NI"/>Hearing this Smaradūtī said, “Oh, Devī, I do not know
the place. I do not understand the directions also. To
which direction am I to drive? The horses look tired.
There is no way here. Anyhow let it go as directed by
God. If we stay here we will be eaten by man-eaters.”
So saying the maid drove the chariot and soon they
reached a forest more grisly than the former. It was a
forest where great yogins lived. There was no light
there neither water nor wind. No sound came. Even
the sounds of the bells on the horses and the chariot
stopped. Vṛndā moaned, “Where are we to go now,
maid! There is no peace of mind for me anywhere in
this world.”
<div n="NI"/>Smaradūtī looking ahead cried, “Look Devī, there is a
great black mountain in front of us. The horses refuse
to move, for they are afraid of it.”
<div n="NI"/>Cold with fear the queen stood up from the chariot and
keeping her hands on the pearl necklace on her breast
jumped out of the chariot. Then a very fierce demon
came towards them. He was yellow in colour with three
legs, five hands, seven eyes and ears like a tiger's and
the shoulders and chin like those of a lion. It was a
horrible sight and Vṛndā hid her eyes with her hands
and trembled like a plantain leaf. The maid jumping
out of the chariot cried aloud “Oh, my queen, help me.
This demon is going to eat me.” The demon approaching
[Page498-a+ 65]
them took the chariot with the horses and whirled it
round in the air. Both the queen and the maid fainted
at this exhibition of strength. The demon ate all the
horses and then catching hold of the hands of the queen
he roared, “If you want your life make me your husband.
Your husband has been killed by Śiva in the battle. If
you join me you can live for years together without
fear. Come on, drink this sweet liquor with flesh”.
Vṛndā became half dead when she heard that.
<div n="NI"/>At that time Mahāviṣṇu in the guise of an ascetic
wearing barks of trees and matted hair appeared
before them. An angered look form Viṣṇu sent the
demon away from the place. Vṛndā took refuge in the
ascetic and the false ascetic said, “I am Devaśarmā, son
of Bharadvāja. Renouncing all worldly pleasures I have
come here to do penance and if it pleases you, you can
come and stay in my āśrama and do penance. We can
go to another forest far away from here.” As soon as
they reached the āśrama Mahāviṣṇu appeared before
her in the figure of Jalandhara. They embraced each
other and lived there joyfully for many days. One day
at the end of a sexual act Vṛndā saw instead of Jalan-
dhara the ascetic in embrace with her. She was shocked
and stood up separated from him. Then Mahāviṣṇu
said “Vṛndā, I am Viṣṇu husband of Lakṣmī. Your
husband has gone to conquer Śiva and get Parvatī for
himself. I am Śiva also. We appear separate. Your hus-
band Jalandhara has been killed in the battle. Join with
me.”
<div n="NI"/>Vṛndā got angry. She cursed Viṣṇu ; she said, “You
cheated me by pretending to be an ascetic. Let your
wife also be once cheated by a false ascetic.” The
cursed Viṣṇu disappeared and Vṛndā started penance.
Many Gandharva ladies came with temptations to dis-
suade Vṛndā from continuing the penance. But all such
attempts failed and Vṛndā ended her life doing penance.
<div n="NI"/>The nymphs showered flowers on her from above and
the dead body of Vṛndā was cremated by Smaradūtī
and Smaradūtī jumped into the funeral pyre of Vṛndā
and gave away her life. The nymphs made an image of
her with the ashes from the funeral pyre and floated it
on the river Gaṅgā.
<div n="NI"/>Pārvatī did not consent to having any sexual enjoyment
with Māyāśiva and she escaped from the place and went
to Ākāśagaṅgā and started doing penance there. One day
Pārvatī called her maid Jayā to her side and said “Jayā
you go in my dress to Śiva and find out whether he is
really Śiva or not. If he kisses you and embraces you he
will surely be a dānava come in disguise by his Māyā.
But if he asks you about my welfare he will be real Śiva.
Go and tell me what happens.”
<div n="NI"/>Jayā went to Māyāśiva. Jalandhara when he saw her
mistook her for Pārvatī and caught hold of her and
immediately semen flowed out from him. Jayā returned
and told Pārvatī that it was Jalandhara and not Śiva.
Pārvatī afraid of Jalandhara hid in a lotus and her
companions became beetles sitting on the lotus. In the
meantime the guards of the palace finding the queen
absent from the palace reported the matter to Śumbha
fighting against Śiva. He sent Caṇḍamuṇḍas to Jalan-
dhara to inform him of the situation. Jalandhara-came
back to the battle-field running and took up the fight
against Śiva again.
<LEND>
