<L>4536<pc>502-b<k1>मिथि<k2>मिथि
MITHI¦ (MITHI JANAKA). Son of King Nimi. The
sixth chapter of Devī Bhāgavata gives the following
story about the birth of Mithi.
[Page503-a+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>There was once an emperor of great renown in the line
of Ikṣvāku named Nimi. He was the twelfth son of the
celebrated Ikṣvāku and was devoted to the welfare of
his subjects. He was a very honest, virtuous, righteous
and good-natured man of a charitable disposition. The
agrahāra (village where brahmins reside) named
Jayantapura near the āśrama of Gautama Maharṣi was
constructed by this emperor. This emperor of a Rājaṣic
mind decided to perform a yāga which would take
years for its conclusion and in which land was to be
given as gifts. He went to his father Ikṣvāku, and took
permission from him to conduct the yāga. He made all
preparations for the yāga. He invited Bhṛgu, Aṅgiras,
Vāmadeva, Pulastya, Pulaha and Ṛcīka all of whom
were well-versed in the Vedas and were worthy of being
priests in a Yāga of the kind he was conducting. He
then went and invited his Kulaguru (family priest and
preceptor) Vasiṣṭha for the Yāga. But Vasiṣṭha had to
officiate at a Yāga conducted by Indra and so he
commanded Nimi to postpone the Yāga by five hundred
years. Nimi did not act according to it and he perform-
ed the Yāga with the help of the other sages and com-
pleted it successfully. After five hundred years when
the Yāga of Indra came to a close, Vasiṣṭha came to see
Nimi. Nimi was asleep then and the servants in the
palace hesitated to go and inform him of the arrival of
the sage. Vasiṣṭha got angry and cursed him and made
him Videha (without body). At once the body of the
King fell to the ground and the soul got out of it. But
before the soul separated from the body Nimi cursed
Vasiṣṭha also and separated his soul from his body.
Vasiṣṭha was again born as the son of Mitrāvaruṇas.
<div n="NI"/>The other sages present there took the lifeless body of
Nimi and after sacrificial ceremonies and worship of
gods started to churn the body. After some time a mighty
and perfect man of great brilliance was born out of it.
Because he was born by Mathana (churning) he was
named Mithi. Because he was born from his father
(Janaka) he was called Mithijanaka and because he was
born of Nimi, a Videha, he was called Videha also.
The country which was ruled by Mithi got the name
of Mithilā. It is the country of Sītā.
<LEND>
