<L>4583<pc>505-b<k1>मृतसञ्जीवनी<k2>मृतसञ्जीवनी
MṚTASAÑJĪVANĪ¦. This is a medicinal herb to give
life to those who are dead. When in the Rāma-Rāvaṇa
battle Lakṣmaṇa and others fell dead, Śrī Rāma
wanted Mṛtasañjīvanī to be brought to revive them
back to life. Jāmbavān the oldest among the monkey-
warriors then instructed Hanūmān to get it from the
mountain Mahāmeru explaining to him the way to
reach there. He said: “If you go a hundred yojanas
(1200 Kilometres) from here to the north you would
reach Rāmeśvara the southernmost point of Bhārata.
From there if you go to the north another thousand
yojanas you would reach the Himālayas which is the
northern-most point of Bhārata. Himavān is thousand
yojanas high, two thousand yojanas wide and is
long enough to reach the two oceans on the east and
the west.
<div n="NI"/>On that mountain is the marriage-dais of Pārvatī and
Parameśvara and you will find places where Parameś-
vara had sat for practising penances. On the northern
side under a big Kūvala tree lies Kāmadhenu. This
cow gives milk to the sages and tourists who go there.
[Page506-a+ 64]
Nine thousand yojanas to the north of this there are
two mountains named Hemakūṭa and Ratnakūṭa. The
centre of that is Ṛṣabhavarṣa. On a big Kāraskara
tree there will be hanging a king with his face down-
wards after being cursed by the sage Durvāsas. He
will be released from the curse by you. If one eats the
fruits of this tree one will be free from greying of hairs
and rugosity.
<div n="NI"/>If you go farther north from Hemakūṭa you will reach
the mountain Niṣadha. There is a lake there. If one
bathes there one will be granted all prosperity by
Lakṣmīdevī. Farther to the north is situated Mahāmeru.
The greatness of this mountain is indescribable.
<div n="NI"/>Mahāmeru has got four supporting mountain pillars
named Mandara, Merumandara, Supārśva and
Kumuda. The abode of the three deities is on the top
of this mountain. On a peak in the centre is living
Brahmā with his wives Vāṇī, Gāyatrī and Sāvitrī as
creator of the universe. This place is called Satyaloka
and to the west of it is Śrī Vaikuṇṭha the abode of
Mahāviṣṇu. Mādevī and Bhūdevī are his two wives.
He is the god who protects us all. To the east of
Satyaloka is Kailāsa, the abode of Śiva. He lives there
with his wives Gaṅgā and Pārvatī and sons Gaṇeśa
and Śubrahmaṇya. To the south of Satyaloka is the
city Saṃyamanī the abode of Yamadharmarāja. He
lives there with his wife Kālinī and sons Viḍava,
Mahimā and Dīpaka. To the east of this is the wonder-
ful Devaloka. There lives Indra, his wife Śacīdevī and
son Jayanta with thirtythree crores of Devas. Celestial
nymphs like Urvaśī, Rambhā and Tilottamā live there.
Kāmadhenu, the Kalpa tree, Airāvata, Uccaiśśravas,
and Cintāmaṇi are all there. You will find Amarāvatī
the Capital of Indra and Sudharmā his court there.
<div n="NI"/>On the northern side of Meru is a tall Aśvattha tree.
To the north of that is the Nīla-mahāgiri (the great
blue mountain). Kaśyapa has installed a deity named
Śvetavarāhamūrti there. Beyond that is the Ṛṣabhādri
(ox-shaped mountain). It is believed that a divine ox
became a mountain there. Its two horns are like two
peaks. This mountain contains many divine medicines
of which Śalyaharaṇī, Viśalyakaraṇī, Sandhānakaraṇī
and Mṛtasañjīvanī are the most important.
<div n="NI"/>Once the asuras defeated the Devas. Then Parameś-
vara and Mahāviṣṇu gave the Devas these four
medicinal herbs. They planted them here and watered
them from the Milk-sea. Around these precious plants
stand guard the pārṣadas of Śiva and the Discus
Sudarśana of Viṣṇu.” (Yuddha Kāṇḍa, Kamba
Rāmāyaṇa).
<div n="NI"/>There is another statement in the Mahābhārata that
Sañjīvanī is an art, the use of a mantra. Śukrācārya
by this art brought to life all the asuras killed in a war
with the devas. (Śloka 8, Chapter 76, Ādi Parva).
Again Śukrācārya brought to life three times his dis-
ciple Kaca whom the asuras killed three times. Śukrā-
cārya taught the art to Kaca. (Śloka 28, Chapter 76,
Ādi Parva).
<LEND>
