<L>4602<pc>507-b<k1>मुक्ताफलकेतु<k2>मुक्ताफलकेतु
MUKTĀPHALAKETU¦. A Vidyādhara youth. The
story of this young man who was born to kill Vidyud-
dhvaja, a fire-brand of an asura, is told thus in Kathā-
saritsāgara.
<div n="NI"/>An eminent asura of name Vidyutprabha performed
penance to propitiate Brahmā to get a son. As a
result of the blessings of Brahmā he got a son invincible
to the Devas. He was named Vidyuddhvaja. Even
from boyhood he was very brave and daring. Once
when he saw some demons standing guard to protect
the asura family he said “At present our country is
being protected by the hands of others. I shall, there-
fore, perform penance and obtain boons to remove
this disgrace. I will conquer our enemies.” Vidyud-
[Page508-a+ 65]
dhvaja went straight to the forests and performed penance
to propitiate Brahmā. When the austerities became
severe, Vidyuddhvaja observed fasting without break
and the whole world became excited due to anxiety.
So Brahmā appeared before him in person and gave
him many divine weapons like Brahmāstra. For
Brahmāstra the only counter-missile was Pāśupata
and so Brahmā warned him that it should be used
only when it was found absolutely necessary.
<div n="NI"/>Vidyuddhvaja became arrogant with the possession of
such divine weapons and started for Indraloka with
his father and his army to conquer Indra. He knew
that Indra was ready to face him with a big army
headed by Candraketu and Padmaśekhara.
<div n="NI"/>The battle that ensued was very grim. Even Brahmā
and Rudra came to see the fight. In a combat with
Indra, Vidyutprabha was killed. Vidyuddhvaja saw
his father killed, got furious and sent Brahmāstra
against Indra who in turn opposed it with Pāśupata.
Vidyuddhvaja fainted. Devas sounded the trumpets of
victory and left the place.
<div n="NI"/>After some time Vidyuddhvaja awoke from the swoon
and lamented thus to those of his men who were
around:—“My tapobala (strength resulting from
penance) was of no use. I have decided to die fighting
against Indra. I do not want to return to a country
where my father is not alive. On hearing this his aged
minister pointed out to him his mistake in having
used the Brahmāstra untimely.
<div n="NI"/>Vidyuddhvaja decided to attain more powers and so
he went to the base of the Himālayas to perform
penance to propitiate Śiva. Pleased at his penance of
five thousand years Śiva appeared in person and asked
him to name the boon he wanted. Vidyuddhvaja
demanded “I must be able to kill Indra in a battle.”
Śiva granted him the boon.
<div n="NI"/>Vidyuddhvaja once again attacked Indra with a huge
army. In the fierce battle that followed Indra fell
down fainting by the weapons of Vidyuddhvaja. At
once a voice from the air commanded, “Take away
Indra from the battlefield. It is dangerous to keep
him there” Vāyu came and carried him away swiftly.
When Indra awoke from fainting he went to
Brahmaloka with all the other devas.
<div n="NI"/>Vidyuddhvaja established himself in Amarāvatī, the
capital city of Indra and lived there enjoying his life
as Indra. In the meantime Candraketu, King of the
Vidyādharas was sitting in Vāyuloka musing thus, “How
long should we remain thus displaced from our
positions! There is no waning of the power of Vidyud-
dhvaja. My friend Padmaśekhara, King of Gandhar-
vas, has gone to Śivapura to perform penance. I do
not know whether he has been blessed by god. Anyhow
I will act after hearing from him.”
<div n="NI"/>As his musings came to an end Padmaśekhara himself
appeared before him and said: “I have come to tell you
the glad news that Śiva told me. Śiva said “Son, do
not grieve. You will get your country back. You will
get a son and a daughter. They will be top-ranking
men in all activities. The husband of your daughter
will kill Vidyuddhvaja.”
<div n="NI"/>A happy Candraketu went to Kailāsa with his wife
Muktāvalī and started penance. Padmaśekhara went
and mentioned to the devas all that had happened.
The devas then went to Mahāviṣṇu and told him of
[Page508-b+ 65]
the boons which Vidyuddhvaja had received from Śiva
and how he was ruling Indraloka then. After hearing
them patiently Viṣṇu said that only Śiva could do
anything in that matter. They all then went to the
temple of Siddhīśvara and sat there meditating on
Śiva.
<div n="NI"/>In the meantime Bhagavān appeared before Candraketu
and blessed him and said he would get a very valorous
son who would kill Vidyuddhvaja and restore Devaloka
to the devas. But after that he would be born as a man
on earth by a curse. Padmāvatī daughter of a
Gandharva King, would by the strength of her penance
release him from the curse and help him to get his
original state as a Gandharva. He would then marry
Padmāvatī and remain as emperor of the Vidyādharas
for ten Kalpas together. Candaraketu and wife came
back to Vāyuloka.
<div n="NI"/>At this time Śiva appeared in person to those sitting
in the temple of Siddhīśvara and said that a son would
be born to Candraketu from a part of his and that
valorous youth would kill Vidyuddhvaja. Muktāvalī
wife of Candraketu became pregnant at that time and
soon delivered a son. He was named Muktāphalaketu.
Even from boyhood he became an ardent devotee of
Śiva and started performing penance to propitiate
Śiva. Śiva appeared before him and gave him the
secrets of many techniques in archery.
<div n="NI"/>Vidyuddhvaja was once bathing in a river when muddy
waters flowed from up the river and the arrogant
demon sent a servant to find out the cause thereof.
When he went up by the shores he saw an ox and an
elephant bathing in the river. They were the Vāhanas
of Śiva and Indra. The elephant was the famous
Airāvata. He came back and intimated to Vidyuddhvaja
what he saw. The demon then ordered his people to
bring the culprits to his side. But the Vāhanas killed
those who went to capture them and then they went
to their masters, Śiva and Indra. Hearing about this
audacity of the demon-chief the Devas challenged the
asuras to a fight. This time the army of the devas was
led by Muktāphalaketu.
<div n="NI"/>A Gandharva princess named Padmāvatī grew up to
be a beautiful maiden at that time. She was in love
with Muktāphalaketu. Padmāvatī was one day plucking
flowers from a pond in the Gandharva land thinking
about Muktāphalaketu who had gone to war against
the asuras. A demoness who was going to eat flesh in the
battle-field of the devas and asuras saw Padmāvatī, took
her and went up. Muktāphalaketu coming to know of
this went up with her and got back Padmāvatī who was
struggling in the hands of the demoness like streaks of
lightning among clouds. Then he asked her maids about
her and they said, “She is the daughter of the Gandharva
King Padmaśekhara. Padmāvatī is her name. She is
unmarried. But she is betrothed to the son of Candra-
ketu named Muktāphalaketu, who is born to destroy
Vidyuddhvaja. She has come here to practise
penance for the success of her father and Muktāphala-
ketu in this war between devas and asuras.”
<div n="NI"/>Padmāvatī recognised Muktāphalaketu from the words
of his followers. But the latter had to go back to Deva-
loka under instructions from Indra. The Devāsura war be-
came fierce. By the valour and skill of Muktāphalaketu
many of the asuras were killed. The war was won.
Muktāphalaketu was given a grand reception at devaloka
[Page509-a+ 64]
and was then sent back. Muktāphalaketu did not seem
to be happy and everybody thought that it might be
due to his having killed Vidyuddhvaja. But the real
cause was his separation from Padmāvatī.
<div n="NI"/>A sorrow-stricken Padmāvatī sent her female companion
Manoharikā to the country of Vidyādharas to enquire
about Muktāphalaketu. What she saw there was a sad
Muktāphalaketu pining to see Padmāvatī. Both now
understood each other and Manoharikā returned with
presents for Padmāvatī from Muktāphalaketu.
<div n="NI"/>At that time Muktāphalaketu went to see a Maharṣi
named Tapodhana. Disregarding the objections of
the disciple Dṛḍhavrata who stood guard outside the
āśrama Muktāphalaketu entered the āśrama with his
friend. Dṛḍhavrata followed them. When they entered
the āśrama they found the āśrama empty and at once
Dṛḍhavrata cursed them both to be born on earth as
men. Padmāvatī fainted when she heard the news.
When she regained her consciousness she started
practising austerities sitting in a temple devoted to
Gaurī, wife of Śiva. She meditated on her husband
Muktāphalaketu in his life on earth and performed
penance to propitiate Śiva. By the grace of Śiva
Muktāphalaketu got his original life and he married
Padmāvatī and led a happy married life. (Taraṅga 2,
Padmāvatīlambaka, Kathāsaritsāgara.)
<LEND>
