<L>4654<pc>513-a<k1>नाडीचक्र<k2>नाडीचक्र
NĀḌĪCAKRA¦. The ten nāḍīs where the yogī in medita-
tion retains the five prāṇas form the nāḍicakra.
<div n="NI"/>At the bottom of the nābhi (nābhīkanda) innumerable
nāḍīs or nerves originate or sprout up. 72,000 such
nāḍīs exist at the centre of the nābhi (navel). The whole
body is filled with these nāḍīs spread out in parallel and
horizontal positions, and they exist in the form of
circles entwined with one another. Ten nāḍīs are promi-
nent amongst them, i.e. Iḍā, Piṅgalā, Suṣumnā,
Gāndhārī, Hastijihvā, Pṛthā, Yaśā, Alambuṣā, Kuhā
and Śaṅkhinī. Any defect or harm caused to any one
of these ten nāḍīs may lead even to death.
<div n="NI"/>There are ten Vāyus (winds) in the body. The five Prāṇas
called Prāṇa, Apāna, Samāna. Udāna and Vyāna, and
the five Vāyus called Nāga, Kūrma, Kṛkala, Devadatta
and Dhanañjaya together constitute the ten Vāyus.
Prāṇa is the most important Vāyu. This vāyu does the
emptying as well as the refilling of the other nine vāyus
and thus sustains life. The prāṇavāyu has its existence
ever in the chest of living beings and fills the body
with air through breathing in, out, coughing etc. It
depends on life and it is called Prāṇavāyu as it moves
or travels with life.
<div n="NI"/>Apāna leads vāyu downwards. It is Apāna which directs
man's food downwards. Also it keeps in its fold urine
and semen. This vāyu is called Apāna as its function is
adhonayana (leading downwards) as mentioned above.
Samānavāyu conveys to the different parts in the body
in equal manner the things which living beings eat,
drink and smell as also blood, bile, phlegm and vāta.
Udāna causes the shivering of lips, flushing of face and
eyes and excitement of joints etc. Vyāna causes the
limbs to be closed and stretched, and it excites diseases.
Nāga exists in nausea, Kūrma in the bulging of the eyes
[Page513-b+ 65]
Kṛkala in food, Devadatta in yawning and Dhanañjaya
in sound. Dhanañjaya does not quit the body even after
death.
<div n="NI"/>Life, Prāṇa, travels through the nāḍīcakra depending on
ten different courses, i.e. Saṅkrānti, Viṣuva, Ahar,
Rātri, the two ayanas (Dakṣiṇa and Uttara), Adhivāsa
Ṛṇa, Ūnarātra and Dhana. Ūnarātra means hiccough,
Ṛṇa cough, Dhana breathing and Adhivāsa yawning.
Of the two ayanas, Uttara and Dakṣiṇa, the former is
the course towards the left and the latter towards the
right and Viṣuva is the centre between the two.
Saṅkrānti is the change of position of Viṣuva. On he
left side of the human body is the nāḍī called Iḍā, on
the right side Piṅgalā and between the two Suṣumnā.
The prāṇa above these three nāḍīs is Ahar i.e. day and
that below is Apāna, i.e. night. Thus every vāyu assumes
ten different forms.
<div n="NI"/>There are various kinds of prāṇāyāma (control of
breaths). Prāṇāyāma practised with the prāṇa contained
in the centre of the body is called Candragrahaṇa;
that which supersedes physical principles is called
Sūryagrahaṇa. To fill the stomach with as much of vāyu
as is desired is Pūrakaprāṇāyāma. To remain like a full
pot, all breathing stopped, (Pot completely filled)
having closed all the openings—‘doors’—of the body is
Kumbhaka. The yogī practising Kumbhaka should
direct the vāyu upwards in one breath, and that practice
is called Recaka. He who does it should be conversant
with the yoga of inhalation. Erudite people call it
Japa, because when it is practised Śiva resident in one's
own body awakes within. Śiva, the King of yogins,
chants the mantra (japa) 21,6000 times within the course
of one day and one night. The soul chants the mantra—
Gāyatrī—of which Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva are the pre-
siding deities, and that is called Ajapa. He who chants
Ajapa will have no future births. Prāṇāyāma should be
followed by Kuṇḍalinīyoga, Kuṇḍalinī meaning primor-
dial force. The force is a compound of Sun, fire and
Moon and its seat is the heart, where it exists in the form
of a sprout. Since creation is dependent upon this force
power for creation should be invoked on it. The yogin
should picture in his mind that nectar flows out of
Kuṇḍalinī. He should also realise that the soul within
the body possesses form while pure soul is formless. He
should address this soul as ‘Haṃsa Haṃsa’. Haṃsa
means Śiva. Śiva exists and functions inside and outside
the body just as oil is in the gingelly seed and fragrance
in flower. Soul possessing form is of five kinds. Accord-
ingly Brahmā's seat is the heart, Viṣṇu's the neck,
Rudra's, the centre of the throat; Maheśvara's the
forehead; and Śiva's, the tip of the prāṇa. Soul without
form is just contrary to the above. Its place is where
the prāṇa ends. By prāṇāyāma the formless soul may
be experienced. (Agni Purāṇa, Chapter 214).
<LEND>
