<L>4671<pc>515-a<k1>नागास्त्र<k2>नागास्त्र
NĀGĀSTRA¦. A destructive weapon (arrow). The
following story about the astra is told in the Yuddha
Kāṇḍa of Kamba Rāmāyaṇa.
<div n="NI"/>In olden times there was a very powerful and mean
asura called Nāga. Brahmā resorted to virulent black
magic to kill Nāga, and from the fire-pit arose a terri-
ble goblin called Nāgapāśa. It was deputed to kill
Nāga and the Trimūrtis followed it. Nāgapāśa went
to the city of Nāgāsura called Vīramahendra, ascended
its tower and made a terrible noise the echo of which
caused abortion in all the pregnant nāga women. Many
children fainted and many died. Nāgāsura deputed his
army chieftain Vīrasena with an army to kill the nāga
goblin. At the sight of the army the goblin raised
another terrible cry, which blew off Vīrasena and his
army, reducing them to powder. Then Nāgāsura's
minister with a big army attacked the goblin. But the
minister was devoured by him, and the army annihilated.
Enraged at this defeat of his minister, Nāgāsura attack-
ed the goblin with an army of crores of soldiers. But,
within seconds the goblin devoured the mighty army.
At last Nāgapāśa and Nāgāsura engaged themselves in
a duel which lasted for years. Ultimately the goblin
swallowed up Nāgāsura also. Then he went to the
Trimūrtis and saluted them. They granted him many
boons, and Śiva, in excess of joy, wore it as one of the
ornaments round his neck. Some time later Nāgapāśa
set out on a tour to see the fourteen worlds, and Śiva
specially instructed him not to visit the Śālmali island.
He visited the various worlds earning all knowledge
and started for mount Kailāsa. On his way he saw
Śālmali island, the abode of nāgas, and in violation of
Śiva's instructions, he entered the island. The nāgas
there did not honour him and his false pride made him
tremble with rage. Then the nāgas of the island told
him thus: “We have a powerful enemy, who visits us
every month, and unless we feed him sumptuously he
will devour all of us for food He is to come today, and
if you are capable enough, you defeat and drive him
off and save us. If you do so, we shall crown you as our
King and honour you.”
<div n="NI"/>The powerful enemy of the nāgas was Garuḍa and he
came. All the nāgas ran off at his sight. Garuḍa then
attacked the goblin Nāgapāśa, who was standing un-
perturbed before him. There being no chance of vic-
tory for the goblin he ran away and took refuge with
Śiva. Garuḍa also followed him, and demanded of
Śiva to return to him, his enemy, the goblin. Śiva
told Garuḍa thus:—“If, in future he (the goblin)
interferes with anybody connected with you, you may
either punish or eat him. Do not do anything with him
now”.
<div n="NI"/>Garuḍa agreed to the above proposal of Śiva. From
that day onwards Nāgapāśa lived in Vaikuṇṭha en-
twined with nooses. He became the arrow called nāga-
pāśa or nāgāstra.
<LEND>
