<L>4705<pc>521-b<k1>नम्बूतिरि<k2>नम्बूतिरि
NAMBŪTIRIS¦. (Malayāla Brahmins). Logan says that
the Nambūtiris were the batch of Aryans that settled
down in Kerala after the Nairs. The historians like
Śaṅkuṇṇi Menon and others have stated that the Nambū-
tiris had come to Kerala from the banks of the rivers
Godāvarī, Narmadā and Kāverī. Famous historians have
inferred that the progress of the Aryans to the south
took place between 1000 and 325 B.C. But Thomas
Fawlks thinks that there were Nambūtiri priests and
hermits in South India, during the time of Buddha.
N.K. Datta, the author of the book “Aryanisation of
India”, is of opinion that during the time of the inva-
sion of Alexander, the Aryans had spread all over
India and Ceylon. Thus historians have not yet come to
an agreement as to the correct period of the exodus of the
Aryans to the south. Anyhow in the Geography of
Ptolemy mention is made that half a degree east to
Taibis there was a place called Brahmagāra. It may
be assumed that Brahmagāra may be Brahmāgāra
(settlement of Brahmins). It has been decided definitely
that the period of Ptolemy was A.D. 2nd century, and
in that case the Brahmins must have settled in the
south before that period.
<div n="NI"/>Though the period of the ‘Saṅgha poets and their works’
has been assessed differently by different scholars, the
majority have fixed it as the first few centuries of A.D.
In these Saṅgha poems the gods of the Aryans are
praised. The gods Sūrya (the Sun), Candra (the moon),
Varuṇa (god of water), Baladeva (Śrī Kṛṣṇa's elder
brother) and Viṣṇu (Supreme God) are specially men-
tioned in ‘Cilappadikāra’. The Saṅgha work ‘Puranā-
nūru’ is an encomium to the purity of the Vedas and
Agnihotra Brahmins (Brahmins who maintain the holy
fire by burnt offering). In those days the King carried
on the administration of the country with the advice
of Brahmins. Economics, Grammar and law were taught
in royal palaces. Pañcākṣara and such other spells,
reading of the scriptures, Aryan ways of marriage, Recita-
tions of Purāṇic stories etc. were prevalent in those days.
Maṇimekhalā is stated to have reached the capital
of the Cera King and learned Vedas and Sāṅkhya
doctrines (one of the six systems of Indian Philosophy
dealing with evolution) from the prominent teachers
here. The diction of both the works ‘Cilappadikāra’ and
‘Maṇimekhalā’ is, to a certain extent, indebted to Sans-
krit. Many of the Sanskrit poetic traditions are used in
these poems. When these proofs are taken into account,
it is not wrong to presume that in the period from 1st
century to 5th century A.D. Aryan civilization prevailed
in south India. If, during this period, Aryan civilization
[Page522-a+ 65]
had taken root to such an extent in south India, the
advent of the Aryans to south India must have taken
place at least two or three centuries prior to this period.
<div n="NI"/>The Nambūtiris of Kerala are called Malayāla
Brahmins. Between them and the Brahmins of other
countries there are differences in manners and customs.
They are given below:—
<div n="NI"/>1) The Brahmins of other parts of India do not per-
form agnihotra rites (maintaining the holy fire by burnt
offering) so elaborately as the Malayāla Brahmins.
<div n="NI"/>2) Among the sixteen purificatory rites, Agnisvīkāra (or
taking up of sacrificial fire) is an important item in
Malabar. From Vedic period Agni (Fire) had become a
prominent God. Most of the verses in Ṛgveda are con-
cerned with fire. The attachment of the Brahmins of
Kerala to fire shows their antiquity.
<div n="NI"/>3) Much importance is attached to the learning of
scriptures and priest-hood in Kerala. There were 18
Maṭhas and residential institutions in Kerala for giving
religious education.
<div n="NI"/>4) The peculiar type of recitation of the Vedas of
the Malayāla Brahmins and the accompanying gestures
of their hands and the movements of the head at the
time of recitation are considered by them to be ancient.
Even today certain sounds are produced by them in the
Vedic way. (For instance Samrāl—Samrāṭ; Vaṣar—
Vasaṭ; Īḍe—Īle etc.).
<div n="NI"/>5) In Malabar there is a customary atonement or ex-
piation called Vrātyastoma for those Brahmin boys who
had not undergone investiture with the sacred thread
within the stipulated time. This shows the stress laid on
the need of religious education.
<div n="NI"/>6) The custom that all the male members of the family
except the family chief should be engaged in ‘Snātaka-
vṛtti’ (should remain celibates even after education) is
prevalent only in Malabar.
<div n="NI"/>7) Much importance is attached to evening worship
in Kerala. At that time the Vedic gods are not hailed.
But Brahmins of other places do not seem to attach so
much importance to this practice.
<div n="NI"/>8) The Brahmins outside Kerala repeat the mantras
uttered by the priest and perform the functions, at the
time of meditation and worship. But in Kerala for medi-
tation and worship with or without incantations a priest
is not necessary. This indicates the practice in vogue
during Vedic period before the priestly class became
predominant.
<div n="NI"/>9) The Nambūtiris have recognized only three Vedas.
<div n="NI"/>10) The Kerala Brahmins wear only one sacred thread.
The Nambūtiris became predominant in Kerala and
began to have a hand in the various spheres of activities.
Thus the Aryan civilization shook the customary faith
and religion of Kerala from top to bottom and the
Aryan religion hoisted its flag of victory here. Aryan
literature also found its way into Kerala. The authors
and scholars in Kerala began to imitate it. The Nambū-
tiris erected temples in Kerala with the help of local
chieftains. The sounds of alphabets, sentence pattern,
grammar, poetic tradition etc. of Malayālam language
underwent a thorough change. Sanskrit education spread
far and wide. They spread Aryan civilization through
‘Kūttu and Kūṭiyāṭṭam (Narration of mythological
stories with gestures etc. and collective dance) Pāṭhaka
and Saṅghakkali (Musical lectures and dramatic per-
formances), in connection with festivals in the temples.
[Page522-b+ 65]
They absorbed many of the customs and manners of
Kerala. The Nambūtiris who had adopted priest-hood
as their career had amassed wealth and landed property
in the capacities of priests and authorities of the
temples. Some of them became Kings (e.g. King of
Iḍappally, King of Campakaśśeri etc.). They kept up
the contact with the people of the locality by means of
morganatic marriages and made their positions secure.
Thus these people, though a small minority, were able
to hold sway over the people of Kerala for a long
time.
<LEND>
