<L>4706<pc>522-b<k1>नम्माल्वार्<k2>नम्माल्वार्
NAMMĀLVĀR¦. The first of the twelve great Ālvārs. The
Śaivite devotees of South India are called Nāyanārs and
the Vaisṇavite devotees, Ālvārs. The word ālvār means,
a devotee of God. The Vaiṣṇava religion says that the
twelve ālvārs are the incarnations of Ādiśeṣa and Garuḍa
the followers and the embodied deities of the Conch and
the discus the weapons of Viṣṇu. It is mentioned
in Śrīmad Bhāgavata that divine persons who are
followers of Viṣṇu will incarnate on the earth in Kali-
yuga and that their native places will be the banks of
the holy rivers in Drāviḍa such as Tāmraparṇī, Kṛtamālā
(Vaigai), Payasvinī (Pāpanāśinī) and Kāverī. It is
stated about these divine persons in Viṣṇumāhātmya
that they would take birth in any caste and compose
Drāviḍa songs and thereby propagate lofty truths. The
collection of Drāviḍa songs thus composed by the
ālvārs is called ‘Divya Prabandha’ (Divine Composi-
tion).
<div n="NI"/>There are four thousand songs in four parts in the
Divine composition and hence it has the name Nālāyira
Prabandham ‘Four thousand composition’. The theme
of the 1st and 2nd thousands is a secret known as
‘Tirumantra’ (the divine spell). The third thousand
is concerned with the “Caramaśloka” (the verse of
death) and in the fourth “Dvayamantra” is dealt with.
The Tirumantra (the divine spell) is the collection of
of three words Om, namaḥ and Nārāyaṇāya.
<div n="NI"/>‘Om’ and ‘namaḥ’ are explained in the first thousand and
the word Nārāyaṇāya in the second thousand of the
composition. The Caramaśloka (the verse of death) is
the last utterance of the songster-priest. It is a propa-
gation of the theme of seeking refuge. The individual
soul has to seek refuge under the universal soul, un-
conditionally. This is what is called ‘Prapatti. Dvaya-
mantra (the two fold mantra) deals with the aim and
the ways for the realisation of that aim. It would be
possible only by the help of Lakṣmī Bhagavatī (the
goddess Lakṣmī). It is a verse of only two lines.
<div n="NI"/>The first and foremost among the ālvārs is Nammālvār.
‘Tiruvāymoli’ is his work. It had been predicted in
Vaiṣṇava Purāṇa that at the beginning of Kaliyuga.
Viṣṇu Senānī named Viṣvaksena would incarnate as
Nammālvār and that he would reinstate the Vaiṣṇavite
religion. It is hinted in Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa that
Nammālvār would incarnate in Śrīnagarī (Tirunagari)
on the banks of river Tāmraparṇī in the Kingdom of
Pāṇḍya. As was fore-told Nammālvār was born in
Tirunagari. The present name of this place is ‘Ālvār
tirunagari’.
<div n="NI"/>There is a traditional lore about the birth of Nammāl-
vār. There was a ruling chief named Kāriyār in Tiruna-
gari. Udayamaṅkayār was his wife. The couple once
went to the Vaiṣṇavite temple near Mahendra mount-
ain known as Tirukkuruṅkuṭi temple and prayed to the
[Page523-a+ 63]
god consecrated there called Nambi, for a son. Reply
was given through the priests that the god himself
would take birth as their son. Accordingly Udayamaṅ-
kayār gave birth to Nammālvār. Scholars say that the
birth of Nammālvār was on the 43rd day of Kailyuga-
that is in B.C. 3102.
<div n="NI"/>Nammālvār had another name Parāṅkuśa. Some believe
that he was the incarnation of portions of Seneśa and
the jewel Kaustubha. Some say that there are portions
of Mahāviṣṇu, Pañcāyudha, Ādiśeṣa and Seneśa in
Nammālvār. The Vaiṣṇavites have given Nammālvār a
lofty place. The infant born to Kāriyār and Udayamaṅ-
kayār was not an ordinary one. Generally infants at
birth are covered with a case of air called ‘Śaṭha’.
Because of this they lose the memory of previous birth.
But Nammālvār had no Śaṭha. So he got the name
‘Śaṭhakopa’. The parents were amazed at the infant
which lay still without beating its legs, and crying or
sucking its mother's breasts. The bright infant was taken
to the Vaiṣṇavite temple on the twelfth day. Because
of his difference from ordinary infants he was named
Māra. A golden cradle studded with jewels was hung
on the branch of a tamarind tree and laying the child
in it, the parents went home. That tamarind tree still
stands there. The devotees believe that that tree also is
a portion of Ādiśeṣa.
<div n="NI"/>Nammālvār spent sixteen years under the tamarind tree
without opening the eyes or uttering a single word. In
the sixteenth year a wise man who could understand
the dignity of Nammālvār came there. The person was
the Madhura Kavi Ālvār. After this Nammālvār sat
under the tamarind tree and sang songs of praise of
Nārāyaṇa. Madhura Kavi set tunes for them and
sang them. Everybody who heard them was struck with
wonder and stood still. Nammālvār spent his days
under the tamarind tree in meditation and contempla-
tion. At the age of 35 he entered heaven.
<LEND>
