<L>4762<pc>532-a<k1>नरवाहनदत्त<k2>नरवाहनदत्त
NARAVĀHANADATTA¦. A famous Vidyādhara.
Udayana the King of Vatsa had been spending his time
in play and pleasure with his wives Padmāvatī and
Vāsavadattā, when once Nārada appeared before them.
The king greeted the hermit and showed hospitality.
The King and the queens were childless. Nārada told
them: “Hear, oh King. Your wife Vāsavadattā is the
incarnation of Ratidevī blessed by Śiva. The son born
to her would become the emperor of the Vidyādharas.
Not long after this Vāsavadattā conceived and gave
birth to a radiant son. He was named Naravāhana-datta.
At this time Kaliṅgasenā, who had been transformed into
a woman by the curse of Indra, gave birth to an
extra-ordinarily beautiful girl. (For detailed story see
under Kaliṅgasenā). That child was named Madana-
mañcukā. Even in infancy she was surrounded by a halo
of unearthly beauty. Hearing of this child, Vāsavadattā
brought Kaliṅgasenā and the infant to the palace. To
the wonder of everybody, the infants looked at each
other and they were not satisfied how soever long they
looked at each other. The king and his wives under-
stood this perfectly well and at the proper time their
marriage was conducted.
<div n="NI"/>Naravāhanadatta was anointed as the Heir-apparent.
Once he was playing in the garden in the spring season,
with his ministers Gomukha and others, when the most
beautiful Ratnaprabhā came there. (See under Ratna-
prabhā).
<div n="NI"/>Once Naravāhanadatta went for hunting with his
minister Gomukha and retinue. Somehow or other he
was separated from Gomukha and army in the deep
forest. Then he heard a divine song and sound of a
heavenly lyre. He went in the direction from which
the music came. and reached a Śaivite temple. Getting
in, he saw an excessively beautiful damsel standing in
the midst of her attendants and companions singing
and playing on a lute, in praise of Śiva. At this time a
grown-up Vidyādhara woman came down from the sky
and getting near the damsel, gave her to Naravāhana-
datta. The name of the Vidyādhara damsel was
Alaṅkāravatī. (For other details see under Alaṅkāra-
vatī).
<div n="NI"/>As Naravāhanadatta was spending his days, enjoying the
pleasing company of his wife Alaṅkāravatī, once he
went for hunting, with his army. Being very tired they
went in search of water, and entered a thick forest.
There they saw a lake full of golden lotus flowers and
four men plucking flowers. Naravāhanadatta approached
them. They said that they had been plucking flowers
to worship Viṣṇu. Naravāhana followed them to the
presence of Viṣṇu. Mahāviṣṇu was greatly pleased at
Naravāhanadatta who was standing with folded hands
[Page532-b+ 65]
singing praises of Viṣṇu in intense devotion and blessed
him to become the emperor of the Vidyādharas.
(Kathāsaritsāgara).
<LEND>
