<L>4785<pc>536-a<k1>नवमीवरत<k2>नवमीवरत
NAVAMĪVARATA¦. (Fast on the ninth lunar day). This
is a special fast taken in the month of Tulām (October-
November) with a view to obtain ‘Bhukti’ (enjoyment
or possession) and ‘Mukti’ (Beatitude). The important
rite of this worship is to take fast on the ninth night of
the bright lunar fortnight in the month of Tulām and
worship goddess Gaurī. This navamī is also called
Gaurīnavamī. Another name of this navamī is Piṣṭāka
navamī. This name is given because on that day
Piṣṭam (ground rice) is eaten and the goddess is wor-
shipped. In the bright lunar fortnight of the month of
Tulām (Āśvina), on the eighth night when the star is
Mūlam and the Sun is in the zodiac of Kanyā if there
is the touch of Navamī, it is called Aghārdananavamī or
Mahānavamī.
<div n="NI"/>Worship could be conducted on the days mentioned,
by consecrating the goddess Durgā in nine temples
or in one temple only. When the goddess is con-
secrated in nine temples they are meditated upon as
nine separate beings. In such cases Goddess Durgā
should be consecrated with eighteen hands and the rest
of the goddesses with sixteen hands. Of the eighteen
two should be holding Antimony and ḍamaru (a small
drum shaped like an hourglass), and the remaining
sixteen hands should hold weapons that the other
goddesses hold. The nine goddesses to be worshipped
are Rudrā, Caṇḍā, Pracaṇḍā, Caṇḍogrā, Caṇḍanāyikā,
Caṇḍavatī and Caṇḍarūpā and in the middle of these
eight beings the great goddess Durgā who is Ugracaṇḍā
and the slayer of Mahiṣāsura. Durgā is addressed with
the spell of ten letters “Om, Durge Durgekṣiṇi Svāhā.”
Adoration, offering to ancestors and exclamation in
sacrifice (Namaskāra, Svadhākāra and Vaṣaṭkāra)
should be denoted by six words and the Aṅgas (organs)
beginning with heart also should be imagined. This root-
spell should be repeated resting the organs such as heart
[Page536-b+ 65]
etc. on the fingers. He who repeats this secret spell of
goddess, will never be troubled by enemies.
<div n="NI"/>The goddess should be worshipped by meditating upon her
as carrying the weapons such as Kapāla (skull), Kheṭaka
(shield) Ghaṇṭā (bell), Mirror, Tarjanī, bow, dhvaja
(flag), ḍamaru (drum) and pāśa (rope) in the left hands
and Śakti (dart) Mudgara, trident, vajra, sword, spear,
conch, wheel and Śalāka (antimony) in the right hands.
These weapons also should specially be worshipped.
<div n="NI"/>In the worship of the goddess, a cow (sacrificial animal)
should be beheaded with a sword repeating the spell
Kālī Kālī and the blood and flesh of that cow should be
offered as oblation to the goddess Pūtanā uttering the
spell, Kālī Kālī Vajreśvarī, lauhadaṇḍāyai namaḥ.”
Offering to Pūtanā should be made in the south west
corner of the shrine of the Devī. In the same way
offerings of blood and flesh should be made to the
goddesses Pāparākṣasī in the North West corner, Carakī
in the North East corner and Vidārikā in the South
East corner. The same form of offerings should be made
to the god Mahākauśika in the south East corner. The
King should bathe in front of this god Mahākauśika
and making an image of his enemy with rice flour,
should break it. Then give that rice flour as oblation
to the gods Skanda and Viśākha and worship the female
ancestors such as Brāhmī and such others in the night.
As ordained in the Vedas, the Devī should be bathed in
Pañcāmṛta (milk, curds, butter, honey and water) and
then worship before her, uttering the spell “Jayantī-
maṅgala Kālī, Bhadrakālī Kapālinī, Durgā Śivā
Kṣamā Dhātrī Svadhā Svāhā Namostu te”. (Agni
Purāṇa, Chapter 185).
<LEND>
