<L>4789<pc>537-a<k1>नवव्यूहार्चन<k2>नवव्यूहार्चन
NAVAVYŪHĀRCANA¦. This is a worship conducted to
prevent epidemics. In olden days Mahāviṣṇu advised
Nārada on the form of this worship. The form of this
worship is given below:
<div n="NI"/>In the centre of the circular lotus, consecrate Vāsudeva
with the first syllable of mantra (spell) ‘A’. To the
south of him consecrate and worship Saṅkarṣaṇa and
Pradyumna with the syllable ‘Ā’; in the S.E. corner,
Aniruddha with the syllable ‘Aḥ’; in the west, Nārāyaṇa
with the syllable ‘Om’; Brahmā in the N.W. corner
with the syllables ‘Tatsat’; Viṣṇu in the North with the
syllable ‘Hum’; Nṛsiṃha with the syllable ‘Kṣau’
and Varāha in the N.E. corner with the syllable
‘bhūm’.
<div n="NI"/>Consecrate Garuḍa with spells having as first syllables
‘Kam’, ‘ṭam’, “sam” and ‘śam’ at the western entrance of
the lotus figure; Pūrvavaktra, with syllables ‘Kham’
‘cham’, Vam’ and hum’ at the southern entrance of the lotus
figure; Gadā (club), with the syllables ‘Kham’, ‘ṭham’
and ‘Śam’ at the Northern entrance; consecrate Īśa
with the syllables ‘bam’, ‘ṇam’, ‘mam’ and ‘Kṣam, in the
North East corner. Then consecrate Śrī with the
syllables ‘Dham’, ‘Dam’, ‘Bham’ and ‘Ham’ on the
southern side; Vanamālī with the syllables ‘Gam’, ‘Ḍam’
‘Vam’ and ‘Śam’, on the northern side; Śrīvatsa with
the syllables ‘sam’, ‘ham’ and ‘lam’, to the west of
Vanamālī; and Kaustubha, with the syllables, ‘cham’,
‘Tam’ and ‘yam’, to the west of Śrīvatsa.
<div n="NI"/>After having consecrated and worshipped persons as
mentioned above, in the order of the ten member-parts
of Mahāviṣṇu, Ananta should be consecrated below
the seat of the deity and in the order of the ten member
parts of Ananta, the four component parts called Mahe-
ndra and so on should be consecrated on the four direct-
ions such as east and so on, and consecrate in the same
way all the decorations, flags, canopy etc. Then the
three spheres of Vāyu (Air), Agni (fire) and Indu
(moon) should be consecrated with the first syllables
of the spells suited to each and meditating on them
and worshipping them, dip the body in the meditation.
Then imagine that the subtle form of the individual soul
is staying in the sky. Then meditate that the individual
soul is reborn by harmony with the universal soul after
having been dipped and washed in the snow-
white ambrosia emanating from the moon. After
that saying to yourself ‘I am Viṣṇu himself
reborn”, utter the twelve-syllabled mantra or spell.
Place heart, head, turban and weapon respectively on
chest, head, hind part of the lock of hair and Netra (eye).
Place weapons in both hands. After this your body will
become divine. This placing of the individual soul
should be repeated in the same way with Deva (god)
and Śiva. When this worship of Viṣṇu is conducted in
[Page537-b+ 65]
heart in imagination (without the aid of materials) it
is called ‘Anirmālyapūjā, and when it is done with the
aid of lotus figure etc., it is called Sanirmālya pūjā.
<div n="NI"/>At this pūjā (worship) the disciple should stand with
eyes tied. Then on whichever deity he places flower it
should be given that name. Place it on the left side
and burn gingelly, paddy and ghee in the sacrificial
fire. After performing hundred and eight burnings
perform another burning for the purification of the
body. To each of the member-parts of the Navavyūha
deities also burnt offering should be made, no less than
hundred times to each. Then put the entire thing in
fire as burnt offering. Then the disciples should take
fast, and the disciples should offer wealth etc. to the
teacher. (Agni Purāṇa, Chapter 201).
<LEND>
