<L>4850<pc>540-b<k1>निशाकर<k2>निशाकर<h>II
NIŚĀKARA II¦. A great muni, who attained Svarga
after passing through many lives. His story is given
below:—
<div n="NI"/>There was a great ascetic and erudite scholar in all
branches of knowledge called Kośakāra, son of muni
Mudgala. Kośakāra's wife was Dharmiṣṭhā, daughter
of Vātsyāyana. To them was born a son, an idiot and a
deaf and dumb child, whom they forsook at the gates
of the mother's house. At the same time an evil-minded
Rākṣasa woman called Śūrpākṣī, who was in the habit
of lifting children came there with a lean child. She re-
placed Dharmiṣṭhā's child with the lean one and
returned with it to the Śālobharaparvata where her
blind husband asked her what she had brought for his
food. She told him about the changeling child with her
when he said as follows “Return the child at once to
where it was found. The child's father is a great man of
knowledge and wisdom and when he hears about your
action, he will curse us. So, return the child and bring the
child of some one else.” As soon as she heard these words
of her husband she rose up in the sky in great alarm.
<div n="NI"/>Hearing the cries of the Rākṣasa child left at their
gates Dharmiṣṭhā and her husband came out, and
the child which, in its colour and shape resembled their
child exactly, Kośakāra said thus: “Oh! Dharmiṣṭhā!
this must be some ghost. Some one is lying here in the
same form as our child to hoodwink and cheat us.”
[Page541-a+ 65]
Saying so he tied the child to the ground by chanting
mantras with darbha grass in his hands.
<div n="NI"/>At the same time Śūrpākṣī came there in invisible form.
She threw Dharmiṣṭhā's child from a distance into the
courtyard. Kośakāra took his child. But all the attempts
of the Rākṣasī to lift her child from the ground failed.
The grief-stricken Rākṣasī reported the matter to her
husband.
<div n="NI"/>As soon as Śūrpākṣī left the place the magnanimous
Kośakāra handed over the Rākṣasa child to his wife.
He brought up his own child by feeding it on cow's milk,
curd, juice of sugar-cane etc. Both the children grew
up to seven years of age. The Rākṣasa boy was named
Divākara and the other child Niśākara. Both the child-
ren were invested with the sacred thread in due course
of time. Divākara learned the Vedas, but Niśākara did
not, and he was despised by all. His father pushed
him into a neglected well and covered its mouth with
stone.
<div n="NI"/>Niśākara lived in the well for many years. The fruits
of a cluster of plants in the well served as his food. Some
ten years afterwards when Niśākara's mother found the
mouth of the well closed with a big stone she asked
as to who did so, and from the well came the answer,
“Mother, it was father who covered this well with that
stone.” Alarmed at this the mother asked who was with-
in the well, and she was answered, “Your son, Niśākara.”
Then she argued that her son was named Divākara and
that she had no son called Niśākara. But, Niśākara
told her about his past life and what had happened
to him during the present life, upon which the mother
rolled away the stone and Niśākara came out of the
well and prostrated before his mother. He then went
home with his mother. Questioned as to how and why
these things happened by Kośakāra his son Niśākara
described his previous life as follows:—
<div n="NI"/>Father, you would please hear about the reason why I
became dumb and idiotic. In my previous life I was
born in a noble family, my father being called Vṛṣākapi
and mother Mālā. My father taught me all the Śāstras
and the Vedas. I became conceited over my unique learn-
ing and erudition and began doing evil acts. Conceit
led to avarice, and I lost all my scholarship. I became
indiscreet. Having thus become a fool, I began com-
mitting sins. I had to hang myself to death on account
of my association with others' women and stealing
others’ money. I, therefore, fell into the Raurava hell.
After a thousand years some sin remained attached to
me as a result of which I was born as a tiger, and a
King trapped and took me to his city When
I was caged Śāstras about Dharma, Artha and
Kāma came up in my mind.
<div n="NI"/>One day the King went out wearing only one piece of
cloth and with a club in his hands. Then his wife Ajitā,
a unique beauty came to me, and because of my taste
in my previous life sexual desire arose in my heart. I
told her about my feelings. She also felt like me. So,
she unchained me and I approached her in great passion
and seeing me thus the King's servants tied me to a
peepal tree and thrashed me to death.
<div n="NI"/>My soul again returned to hell. After a thousand years
I was born as a white ass in the house of a brahmin
named Agniveśya, who had many wives. Then all
knowledge and wisdom were reflected in my mind. My
duty was to carry the brahmin women on my back. One
[Page541-b+ 65]
day the brahmin's wife Vimati of Navarāṣṭra started
for her father's home mounted on my back. Half-way
home she dismounted and went to a stream to bathe.
The exquisite beauty of that lady with wet clothes up-
set me, and I ran up to her on the stream, pushed her
into the water and myself fell upon her. Then a person
came and tried to tie me down. I escaped from his
grips and ran southwards. While thus running the
saddle slipped into my mouth and I fell down. And,
within six days I died thinking about her. Thus I fell
again into hell. My next birth was as a parrot. A
hunter caged me in the forest and he sold me to a
Vaiśya merchant, who put me up in the women's
quarters. The young women fed me on rice and fruits.
One day the wife of the Vaiśya merchant hugged me
to her breast and petted me. Her touch kindled in me
sexual feelings and I embraced her with my wings. In
my hurry about the affair I slipped down and got
crushed between the doors. Thus I fell again into hell.
<div n="NI"/>Afterwards I was born as an ox in a camp of a
Caṇḍāla. One day he yoked me to his cart and
started for the forest in it with his wife. On the way
she sang a song, and mentally excited by it I looked
back. At once I slipped my feet, fell down and died.
Again I returned to hell.
<div n="NI"/>After another one hundred years I was born as your
(Kośakārad) son in this house. All facts about my
previous lives linger in my memory and now I am free
from evils and am a virtuous person. I am going to the
forest for tapas. Let the good boy, Divākara live here
as house-holder. Niśākara thus did tapas for many
years and attained Vaikuṇṭha (Vāmana Purāṇa,
Chapter 91).
<div n="NI"/>There is no definite evidence in the Purāṇas to estab-
lish that the Niśākara, the protector of Sampāti and
the Niśākara mentioned above were the same person.
<LEND>
