<L>4865<pc>542-a<k1>निशुम्भ<k2>निशुम्भ<h>I
NIŚUMBHA I¦. An asura. Two of the sons of Kaśyapa
Prajāpati by his wife. Diti became notorious fellows
called Śumbha and Niśumbha. They were born and
brought up in Pātāla. But as young men they came to
the earth and began rigorous tapas taking neither food
nor drink. After ten thousand years Brahmā appeared
and asked them to choose their boons. They requested
for eternity, deathlessness. But, Brahmā refused to
grant that boon. Then they thought of another boon,
which would in effect be as good as the first one; they
wanted death to come, but to come in a manner im-
possible to happen. So, they requested Brahmā as
follows: “We shall not meet with death at the hands
of males among Devas, human beings as also by birds,
animals etc. In short we should be killed only by
women; we fear them not.”
<div n="NI"/>Brahmā granted them such a boon and they returned
to Pātāla. They lost their head over the boon and
appointed Śukra as their preceptor. Śukra was so
pleased at this that he made Śumbha sit on a golden
throne and crowned him King of Daityas. Following
this, lesser Kings began coming to salute the great
King and pay tributes. Great daityas like the Caṇḍa-
muṇḍas, Dhūmralocana, Raktabīja etc., became attend-
ants of Śumbha and Niśumbha.
<div n="NI"/>After having established the power of the daityas thus
Śumbha—Niśum bhas gradually turned their atten-
tion towards extending the boundaries of their kingdom.
The whole earth they subjugated. Then Niśumbha
with a large army marched to Devaloka to conquer
Indra. A Devāsura war started. In the fight all the
Dikpālakas were on one side and Niśumbha alone on
the other side; the latter side was slightly defeated.
Smitten by Indra's Vajrāyudha Niśumbha fainted; his
army also was broken.
<div n="NI"/>As soon as news about the defeat of his brother was
reported to him, Śumbha, with the remaining Dānavas
hurried to Devaloka. In the battle that ensued the
Devas were routed. Śumbha assumed Indra-hood by
force and the standard (flag) of the daityas was hoisted
on the flag-staff of Sudharmā, the palace of Indra.
Śumbha captured Kāmadhenu, Airāvata, Uccaiśśravas
etc. The Nandana garden and the shades of the
[Page542-b+ 64]
Kalpaka tree were turned into resting places of the
daityas. Fragrant flowers of the Kalpa tree adorned the
hairs of daitya women. Śumbha drove away Kubera
and took over Alakāpurī also from him. As Yama ran
away from the kingdom, Kālapurī also came under
Śumbha. All the Dikpālakas took refuge in forests and
caves. Thousand years rolled by thus. By then the
Devas worshipped Mahādevī, who appeared before
them. Kauśikī devī, born from the body of Mahādevī
stood before the Devas. As Kauśikī was dark in colour
she came to be known as Kālikā also. Mahādevī,
along with Kālikā started for the capital of Śumbha-
Niśumbhas. At the capital they ascended a mountain
and sat on two rocks. Mahādevī sang such a melodious
song that birds and animals lost themselves in its
sweetness and stood motionless.
<div n="NI"/>The Caṇḍamuṇḍas, who were at the time passing that
way were also attracted by the music. Having under-
stood what it all meant they hurried upto Śumbhāsura
and gave him a description of the supreme beauty of
Mahādevī and Kālikā. The description kindled great
interest in Śumbha and Niśumbha about the devīs and
they deputed their minister Sugrīva to bring the devīs
over to them. Having heard Sugrīva's mission Mahā-
devī told him as follows:—“We do not have any
objection to becoming the wives of your masters But,
in the matter of my marriage there is a special problem.
While playing with my friends as a child I had
accidentally taken a vow. I was at that age a bit proud
about my capabilities and strength, and the vow I took
was that I would marry only someone who was stronger
than I am. My friends called me a ‘fool’ and ridiculed
me about the vow. That only hardened my stubborn-
ness and I stand by my vow even now. Therefore,
please tell Śumbha first to defeat me in fighting.”
<div n="NI"/>When Sugrīva carried this information to Śumbha, and
Niśumbha, they felt amused that a woman challenged
them to fight. But, they had no alternative but to
fight. So they deputed the mighty daitya Dhūmrākṣa
with an army to fight Devī, and there ensued a fierce
fighting between Devī and Kālikā on one side and the
big daitya army on the other side. The whole army and
finally Dhūmrākṣa too was killed.
<div n="NI"/>Devī then retired from the battlefield to a place nearby
and blew the conch. Śumbha-Niśumbhas heard the
sound from it, and the next moment a messenger
came and told them about the fate of the army and of
Dhūmrākṣa. They then sent a much greater army
under Caṇḍamuṇḍas against Devī. But Kālikā devour-
ed them all. Raktabīja, who next encountered Devī
with a great force, also became food for Kālikā. Then
Śumbha-Niśumbhas entered the battlefield and they too
were killed. Devas thus victorious regained Svarga.
(Devī Bhāgavata, 5th Skandha).
<LEND>
