<L>4926<pc>545-b<k1>पकल्<k2>पकल्
PAKAL¦. Malayālam word meaning Day. A story about
the origin of day, night, dawn and dusk is contained in
Viṣṇu Purāṇa. At the time of the great Deluge every-
thing from gods down to the rocks lay submerged in
Parabrahman (Supreme Being). Brahmā sat in medi-
tation to initiate what he termed as Jagatsṛṣṭi, the
four species of living beings like the devas, asuras, pitṛs
and men. When the meditation proceeded, the Tamoguṇa
in Brahmā became prominent and so first and foremost
of all, the asuras were born from his waist. Then
Brahmā discarded his Tamoguṇa and the manifestation
of the discarded Tamoguṇa became Night. Brahmā sat
again in meditation and from his face sprang out the
devas, who were embodiments of sattvaguṇa. Brahmā
discarded the sattvaguṇa and it then became Day. That is
why asuras are powerful at night and devas by day.
Then another manifestation with sattvaguṇa predominat-
ing sprang out from Brahmā and it was called Pitṛs.
Brahmā discarded that also and it became Dusk.
Brahmā sat again in meditation and then were born
men who were a manifestation of Rajoguṇa. Brahmā
discarded that also and it then became Dawn. That is
why men are strong at dawn and the pitṛs strong at
dusk. It is because of these that it is said that day,
night, dawn and dusk are bodies of Brahmā. All the
above four are an asylum of the three guṇas.
<div n="NI"/>Night is called Uṣā and day, Vyuṣṭi. Sandhyā (dusk)
is the time between Uṣā and Vyuṣṭi. When the fierce
and terrible Sandhyā commences, a set of ferocious
demons called Mandehas desire to eat the Sun. A fight
ensues then between the Sun and the demons and by a
curse of Prajāpati the demons die daily though their
bodies never perish. At that time the best of Brahmins
with the sound of ‘OM’ vibrating recite the gāyatrī and
throw water upwards. That water transforms itself into
Vajrāyudha and burns to death the wicked demons.
The first oblation to the sacrificial fire is performed
reciting the mantra which begins with “Sūryojyotiḥ”.
‘OM’ is but Bhagavān Viṣṇu, lord of the Vedas with
the lustre of Ṛk, Yajus and Sāma. The very utterance of
the word ‘OM’ therefore, destroys the demons
Mandehas. (Chapter 8, Aṃśa 2, Chapter 5, Aṃśa 1,
Viṣṇu Purāṇa).
<LEND>
