<L>4928<pc>546-a<k1>पाक्कनार्<k2>पाक्कनार्
PĀKKANĀR¦. Vararuci, the celebrated astronomer, got
of a Caṇḍālī wife twelve sons. They were called
“Paracci peṭṭa pantīrkulam (The twelve sons born of
a Caṇḍālī).
<div n="NI"/>They were
<div n="NI"/>1. Agnihotrī. 2. Rajakan 3. Uliyanūr Taccan. 4. Vallon
5. Vāyillākkunnilappan. 6. Kārakkalmātā. 7. Vaṭutala
Nāyar. 8. Uppukuṭṭan. 9. Pāṇanār. 10. Nārāyaṇa-
bhrāntan 11. Akavūr Cāttan 12. Pākkanār.
<div n="NI"/>Pākkanār's wife was a very chaste woman devoted to
her husband. There are two stories demonstrating the
devotion she showed to her husband.
<div n="NI"/>(i) It was usual for all the sons of Vararuci excepting
Vāyillākkunnilappan to assemble at the house of Agni-
hotrī for the Śrāddha of their father annually once.
Once after the Śrāddha, all of them sat together for
their meals and the antarjanam (wife) of Agnihotrī
refused to serve an assembly consisting of Pākkanār, a
Caṇḍāla. When Agnihotrī compelled her to do it she
came to the place hiding her face with an umbrella.
Pākkanār enquired about the purpose of the umbrella
and Agnihotrī replied that it was the duty of chaste
and devoted wives to hide their faces from other men.
Then Pākkanār argued that still the brahmin wives who
hid their faces were lacking in devotion and chastity
and the Caṇḍāla women were the only class of women
who were chaste and devoted to their husbands. Every-
body present there joined sides with Agnihotrī and
opposed the argument of Pākkanār. To demonstrate
the devotion of Caṇḍālī wives Pākkanār took Agnihotrī
to his house. On reaching there Pakkanār called his
wife and asked “How much paddy do you have here?”
“Five measures”, she replied. “Pound half of it and
bring it to me”, Pākkanār instructed. The dutiful wife
pounded the paddy, cooked the rice and brought it to
Pākkanār. Pākkanār asked her to throw the rice into
the drain. She did it without the least hesitation. Pākka
nār then asked his wife to pound the remaining paddy
and bring the rice cooked as before. She did so and when
she brought it before Pākkanār he asked her to throw
that also away into the drain. She instantly obeyed.
That day both of them went without meals. They were
so poor.
<div n="NI"/>The next day Pākkanār along with Agnihotrī went to
the illam (house) of Agnihotrī. Pākkanār then asked
Agnihotrī to make his wife do exactly like what
Pākkanār's wife was made to do. Agnihotrī immediate-
ly called his wife and asked her to take two and a half
measures of paddy, pound it, cook it and bring it to
him. “There is rice here ready in stock and so why
should we pound paddy now?” Agnihotrī's wife
questioned. But Agnihotrī insisted and so surrender-
ing to the compulsion she did as she was instructed.
When she brought the rice before him cooked, Agnihotrī
asked her to throw it away into the drain. She hesitated
first but when Agnihotrī insisted she did so very
reluctantly. Then Agnihotrī asked her to take another
two and a half measures of paddy, pound it and bring
the cooked rice once again. The antarjanam (wife)
flew into fury and showered on her husband a heap of
abuses. She went and hid inside and despite repeated
requests from Agnihotrī she never showed her face out
again. Agnihotrī admitted defeat and accepted
Pākkanār's view that a Caṇḍālī woman was more chaste
than a brahmin woman.
[Page546-b+ 64]
<div n="NI"/>(2) Once Agnihotrī came to the hut of Pākkanār.
Pākkanār called his wife to bring a ‘palaka’ (a wooden
plank used for sitting) for Agnihotrī to sit on. She was
at that time drawing water from a well and the bucket
was midway in the well with water. The instant she
heard her husband call her she left the grip on the rope
and rushed to the side of her husband. She did what
was asked of her to do and then returned to the well.
Pākkanār followed her taking Agnihotrī along with
him. When they reached the well Agnihotrī was dumb-
founded. The bucket with water was staying in mid-air
in the well exactly at the position at which Pākkanār's
wife had left it. The power of the chastity of the
woman. (See under Vararuci).
<LEND>
