<L>4970<pc>548-b<k1>पाञ्चाली<k2>पाञ्चाली
PĀÑCĀLĪ¦. Draupadī, wife of the Pāṇḍavas.
<div n="NI"/>i). {%Previous births.%} Pāñcālī had many previous births.
During all these births many gods blessed her saying
that she would have five husbands when she was born
as the daughter of Drupada. Stories about her previous
births lying scattered in the Purāṇas are given below:—
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Māyāsītā.%} When Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa were in
exile in the forest with Sītā, Agni came to Rāma once
and told him in private thus: “Oh Rāma, you have
incarnated on earth to kill Rāvaṇa. The time for that
is drawing nigh and ere long Rāvaṇa would carry away
Sītā. It is not proper that Sītā, the incarnation of
Lakṣmī, should be touched by Rāvaṇa. Therefore I
shall keep Sītā safe with me and I am giving you a
phantom Sītā to be with you in her stead.” Śrī Rāma
took the Māyāsītā from Agni without even Lakṣmaṇa
knowing it and handed over the original Sītā to the
custody of Agni.
<div n="NI"/>While thus Śrī Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa and Māyāsītā were
living together in their hermitage a golden deer was
seen one day in the precincts of their āśrama. Sītā
was enamoured of the beautiful deer and wanted it. So
Rāma keeping Lakṣmaṇa to watch over Sītā went in
search of the deer. Śrī Rāma tried his best to capture
the deer alive. But all his efforts failed and by that
time he had come far from the āśrama following the
deer. So he discharged an arrow and killed it. While
falling dead the deer raised a cry imitating that of
Rāma's and called Lakṣmaṇa for help. The deer was
none other than Mārīca, the uncle of Rāvaṇa. On
hearing the call for help Lakṣmaṇa rushed to the spot
from where the sound came and Sītā was left alone
[Page549-a+ 64]
for some time. Rāvaṇa came to the āśrama at that
time and took the Māyāsītā away to Laṅkā.
<div n="NI"/>Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa went to Laṅkā with an army of
monkeys and after killing Rāvaṇa took back Sītā to
Ayodhyā. Then Rāma in deference to public opinion
put Sītā into the fire to test her purity. At that time
god Agni taking back Māyāsītā gave the real Sītā to
Rāma, unscathed by the fire. Then, when Māyāsītā
was thus abandoned by Rāma she bowed down before
Śrī Rāma and Agni and asked them thus “What am I
to do now? Where should I go?” They advised her
to go to Puṣkara and do penance there and blessed
her saying that at the successful end of her penance
she would become Svargalakṣmī. Paramaśiva was
pleased by her penance and appearing before her
asked her what boon she wanted. Māyāsītā who had
become Svargalakṣmī by then requested Śiva to give
her a husband. She repeated the request ‘Patiṃ dehi’
(Give me a husband) five times and Śiva said that she
would have five husbands in her next life as the daugh-
ter of the King of Pāñcāla with the name Kṛṣṇā.
(9th Skandha, Devī Bhāgavata).
<div n="NI"/>ii) {%Nālāyaṇī (Indrasenā).%} Once there was an aged sage
named Maudgalya. Nālāyaṇī alias Indrasenā was the
wife of Maudgalya. Even though the wife was young
and the husband old, Nālāyaṇī was very chaste. The
sage became very old, grey-haired and rugous, skeleton-
like with a foul smell emanating from his body. He
was always in an angry mood. Still Nālāyaṇī stuck to
him as a chaste, loving and dutiful wife. As time
passed on Maudgalya became a leper. One day while
the sage was eating, a finger of his broke and fell into
the rice. With great calmness and devotion Nālāyaṇī
removed the finger from the rice and ate the rice.
Greatly pleased at this act of hers the sage asked her
what boon she wanted an she replied she desired to
have an amorous life with him as Pañcaśarīra. Maud-
galya granted her the boon and they both travelled
the whole world enjoying an amorous life. When the
sage took the form of a mountain Nālāyaṇī became a
river and when the sage took the shape of a flowering
tree she became a creeper on it. They spent
thousands of years like that and then Maudgalya
became tired of a sexual life and returned to the
ascetic life. Even after such a long period of erotic
life Nālāyaṇī was still lustful and she resented the
decision of her husband to go back to the life of a
hermit. She begged her husband to continue the
same life for some more time. Maudgalya got cross
when she thus caused hindrance to his penance and
cursed her saying that she would in her next life be
born as the daughter of the King of Pāñcāla when she
would have five husbands to satisfy her lust. Greatly
grieved at this curse she practised severe austerities
standing in the midst of Pañcāgni. Pleased with her
penance Śiva appeared before her and blessed her say-
ing that she would be born in her next birth in a very
noble family and she would then have five husbands,
good-natured, doing godly work and equal in valour
to Indra. She then pleaded that she should be
granted the boon to remain a virgin during the coitus
with each of her husbands. Śiva granted that wish.
Then Śiva sent her to the river Gaṅgā, and asked her
to fetch a beautiful young man whom she would be
[Page549-b+ 65]
seeing there. Accordingly she went to the river to do
as she was directed.
<div n="NI"/>At that time all the devas joined together and perform-
ed a Yāga at Naimiṣāraṇya. Kāla, the god of
Death, was one of the chief priests for the function.
The Yāga lasted for a long time and since Kāla was
consecrated for the Yāga he did not attend to his
duties as the god of Death. Death came to a dead
stop and men increased in alarming numbers and the
devas were perplexed. They went to Brahmā and
acquainted him with the frightening situation. Brahmā
sent them to Naimiṣāraṇya. They went there and were
talking to Kāla when they saw a few golden flowers
coming down the river. Getting curious Indra walked
up the river to locate the origin of these flowers. When
he reached the place of origin of Gaṅgā he saw
Nālāyaṇī there. Nālāyaṇī took the beautiful young
man to Śiva. Śiva was at that time engaged in a
game of dice with Pārvatī and Indra did not then re-
cognise Śiva. Indra in his arrogance argued that the
whole universe belonged to him. Śiva jumped up
enraged and ran after Indra who ran to the mouth of
a cave. Śiva caught him and said that he would show
him four Indras inside that cave. Both of them entered
the cave and to the amazement of Indra he saw four
other Indras sitting inside the cave. They were all the
creation of Śiva and with the original Indra the
number of Indras came to five. Then addressing
Nālāyaṇī who had followed them Śiva said, “Oh
beautiful girl, do not be worried. All these five are
your husbands. You will be born as the daughter of
the King of Pāñcāla. Then all these five will
be born in the lunar race and will marry you.”
<div n="NI"/>The Indras agreed to be born on earth and do the
work of God. After that they all went to Mahāviṣṇu
and requested him to give them mighty accomplices to
fulfil their mission. Then Mahāviṣṇu plucked two hairs
from his body, one white and the other black, and
dropped them on the ground. The black hair was
born as Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the white hair was born as
Balarāma, to help the Pāṇḍavas later.
<div n="NI"/>Pāñcālī's two previous births can be explained thus:
Agnideva created Māyāsītā who in turn became Svarga-
lakṣmī to be born as Pāñcālī. Māyāsītā was a part of
Mahālakṣmī and so also Nālāyaṇī who became Pāñcālī
was a part of Lakṣmī. Pāṇḍavas are known to be the
sons of five gods and they used for the procreation of
the Pāṇḍavas Indrāṃśa (part of Indra) thus making
them all Indras. (Chapters 197 and 198, Ādi Parva).
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Birth of Pāñcālī.%} Pāñcālī was born in the palace of
Drupada, King of Pāñcāla. She had a brother named
Dhṛṣṭadyumna. There is a story about their birth in
the Purāṇas:
<div n="NI"/>Drupada insulted Droṇa his classmate in the Gurukula
and Droṇa kept in mind the insult to wreak vengeance
on Drupada. Drupada, therefore, wanted a son to be
born who would defeat Droṇa in a battle. Brahmins
advised him to conduct a Yāga for that purpose. He
decided to conduct one on a large scale and went about
in search of a Yajvā (one who performs sacrifices
according to Vedic rites) and reached Kalmāṣapurī on
the banks of the river Gaṅgā. There he saw a brahmin's
house where lived two sages named Yāja and Upayāja.
They were in figure and nature alike. At first Drupada
went to the younger of the two, Upayāja. He went near
[Page550-a+ 65]
him and after massaging his feet and legs requested him
to officiate in a Yāga aimed at getting for him a son
to conquer Droṇa in a battle. He promised to give
him ten crores of cattle for that and also anything else
the sage wanted. These promises did not make the sage
consent to conduct the Yāga and so the King stayed
at the āśrama serving the sage. A year went by and
one day the sage appeared cheerful and told Drupada
thus: “Oh King, my brother who was walking one day
in a storm saw a fruit lying on his way and ate it with-
out first ascertaining whether the fruit was pure or not.
Again, I have seen him taking food from others freely
and eating it. I think he is wishful about wealth and,
perhaps, if you approach him he may help you.”
<div n="NI"/>Drupada went to Yāja and after serving him to please
him made his request promising him much wealth. Yāja
was ready to perform the Yajña. Upayāja came to them
at that time and Yāja consulted his brother before going
to perform the Yajña. The Yāga was successfully
conducted and at the end the priest Yāja called the wife
of Drupada and gave her havya (clarified butter).
Because the havya was prepared by Yāja and was offered
by Upayāja the sages said that the queen would get two
children. While Yāja was offering oblations to the
sacrificial fire a boy with a crown on his head and
bearing a sword and a bow in his hands rose from the
fire. The ṛṣis present there then said that, that boy would
kill Droṇa. He was named Dhṛṣṭadyumna. Then from
the dais of the Yāga-fire emerged a beautiful lady of
dazzling brilliance. Immediately a voice from heaven
was heard to say thus: “This Sumadhyamā (a girl in
her blossoming youth) would work on the side of God
and will cause terror to the Kauravas.”
<div n="NI"/>Yāja blessed the wife of Drupada saying that the
two children would thenceforth call her mother.
Yāja himself named the boy Dhṛṣṭadyumna and the
girl according to the ethereal voice, Kṛṣṇā. Kṛṣṇā was
dark in complexion. Kṛṣṇā was called Pārṣaṭī because she
was the grand-daughter of Pṛṣata and Draupadī because
she was the daughter of Drupada and Pāñcālī because
she was the daughter of the King of Pāñcāla. Pāñcālī
grew up in the palace of Drupada. (Chapter 167, Ādi
Parva).
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Marriage.%} After escaping from the lac palace the
Pāṇḍavas reached a village named Ekacakrā after
walking a long time through the forests. There they
stayed in a brahmin's house. Every morning they
would go in disguise for begging and return with the
alms in the evening. This was their daily routine and
one day while they were in their daily round they saw
a group of brahmins and they said they were going to
the Svayaṃvara of the daughter of the King of
Pāñcāla. The brahmins invited them also to come
along with them describing in detail the beauty of the
girl and the elaborate and festive arrangements made
for the marriage. The Pāṇḍavas went to Pāñcāla along
with the brahmins. On the way they met Vedavyāsa
and receiving blessings from him they went to the
capital city of Pāñcāla and took their abode in the
house of a potter. Nobody knew who they were.
<div n="NI"/>Drupada had placed a mighty steel bow in the
marriage hall. When all the distinguished guests were
seated in the marriage hall, the King announced that
his daughter would be given in marriage to him who
bent the steel bow and with it shot a steel arrow,
[Page550-b+ 65]
through the central aperture of a revolving disc, at a
target placed above. Many valiant princes from all
parts of Bhārata including the Kauravas had gathered
there. When it was time for the ceremonies to begin
Pāñcālī clad in beautiful robes with a bewitching
charm which excited the royal assemblage entered the
hall with a garland in her hands. Then Dhṛṣṭadyumna
brother of Pāñcālī said “Hear ye, oh princes, seated in
state in this assembly, here is the bow and arrow. He
who sends five arrows in succession through the hole
in the wheel and unerringly hits the target shall win
my sister.”
<div n="NI"/>Many noted princes rose one after another and tried
in vain to string the bow. It was too heavy and
stiff for them. Then Arjuna rose and meditating on
Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme God, strung the bow with
ease and hit at the target. Pāñcālī then put the gar-
land on Arjuna's neck and accepting him as her
husband went with him and stayed that night at the
house of the potter. Drupada that night went to the
house of the potter to make enquiries about his daugh-
ter and son-in-law. His joy knew no bounds when he
knew that his son-in-law was none other than the
celebrated Arjuna. The Pāṇḍavas then took Pañcālī
to their home in Ekacakrā and as soon as Kuntīdevī
heard the footsteps of her sons outside she said from
inside asking them to share that day's alms among
themselves little knowing that it was a bride that
had been brought by them. Thus Pāñcālī became the
common consort of the five Pāṇḍavas. Then the
marriage of Pāñcālī was ceremoniously conducted
after inviting friends and relatives. The Pāṇḍavas then
built a new palace at Indraprastha and lived there.
(Chapters 190 to 220, Ādi Parva).
<div n="NI"/>Śrī Kṛṣṇa was present there along with the leading
members of the clan of Vṛṣṇi. He could recognise
the Pāṇḍavas in spite of their disguise. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
went to the potter's house and visited them. He gave
them valuable presents on the occasion of their
marriage.
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Making Draupadī naked.%} Once Duryodhana challeng-
ed Dharmaputra to a game of dice. Dharmaputra
lost all and in the end in despair pledged Draupadī
and lost her. Immediately Duryodhana asked Vidura
to bring Draupadī to his palace and make her serve as
a servant-maid. Vidura did not consent to that. Then
Duryodhana asked Prātikāmi to bring her. While
entering the palace of Draupadī, Prātikāmi was as
timid as a dog about to enter the cage of a lion. He
informed Draupadī of his mission. Draupadī sent him
back and then Duryodhana sent another messenger.
Draupadī went with him to the court of the Kauravas.
As soon as Duśśāsana saw Draupadī he jumped at her
and caught hold of her hair and dragged her to the
centre of the assembly. When Duśśāsana dragged her
thus she said in piteous tones “I am in my monthly
period and I have only the upper garment on me.
Please do not take me to the assembly.” Duśśāsana
was not moved by these pleadings and he dragged her
still.
<div n="NI"/>Bhīma could not hold himself calm against this atrocity
any longer and in a roar of wrath he abused Dharma-
putra for pledging Pāñcālī thus and losing her.
Arjuna however remonstrated gently with Bhīma.
Then to the consternation of all, Duśśāsana started his
[Page551-a+ 64]
shameful work of pulling at Pāñcālī's robes to strip
her of all the clothes. All earthly aid having failed
Draupadī in utter helplessness implored divine mercy
and succour. Then a miracle occurred. In vain did
Duśśāsana toil to pull the garments completely and
make her naked. As he pulled off each, fresh garments
were seen to come from somewhere and cover her
nudity. Duśśāsana retired from his work exhausted and
disappointed. Then Karṇa ordered that Draupadī
should be sent to the palace of Duryodhana as a
servant-maid. Hearing this Duśśāsana once again
started dragging her. Draupadī wept. Bhīma roared
in fury and said that if his brother, Dharmaputra,
gave him permission he would at that instant smash to
death the Kauravas just like a lion killing the animals.
Bhīṣma and Droṇa interfered and pacified him.
Duryodhana stood up and striking his right thigh with
his right hand challenged Bhīma to a fight. Bhīma-
sena did not like Duryodhana exhibiting his naked
thigh in front of Draupadī and an angered Bhīma
declared that he would in a battle break Duryodhana's
thigh with his mace. Dhṛtarāṣṭra came to the
scene and pacified both of them and turning to
Pāñcālī asked her to name any boon she wanted from
him. Pāñcālī said: “In order that my son, Prativin-
dhya, should not be called a ‘dāsaputra’ (son of a
servant) his father Dharmaputra should be released
from his servitude.” The boon was granted. Then she
requested that all the other Pāṇḍavas should be set
free. That was also allowed. Dhṛtarāṣṭra then asked
her to name a third boon. Pāñcālī then said that all
Kṣatriya women were entitled only to two boons and
so there was no need for a third one. Then Draupadī
took a vow that her hair which was let lose by the
wicked Duśśāsana would be tied properly only by a
hand tainted by the blood of Duśśāsana. After that in
strict obedience to the conditions of the wager the
Pāṇḍavas started for the forests with Draupadī to
spend twelve years in the forests and one year
incognito. (Ten Chapters from Chapter 68, Sabhā
Parva).
<div n="NI"/>5) {%Vanavāsa of Pāñcālī.%} (Life in the forests). During
the exile of the Pāṇḍavas in the forests Pāñcālī was
involved in many events of which a few important
ones are given below:
<div n="NI"/>(i) {%Kirmīra's attack.%} When the Pāṇḍavas were in the
Kāmyakavana, Kirmīra, the brother of Baka, came to
the āśrama where Pāñcālī was taking rest. The demon
was such a fierce-looking giant that Pāñcālī was forced
to shut her eyes by fright and she became wearied like
a river in the midst of five hillocks. Bhīmasena imme-
diately ran to her rescue and killed Kirmīra. (Chapter
11, Vana Parva).
<div n="NI"/>(ii) Pāñcālī consoled Dharmaputra by her soothing
words. (Chapter 27, Vana Parva).
<div n="NI"/>(iii) Once when her woes became unbearable she
condemned the devas. (Chapter 3, Vana Parva).
<div n="NI"/>(iv) While the Pāṇḍavas were on the mountain
Gandhamādana, Pāñcālī persuaded Bhīma to bring for
her the Saugandhika flower. (See under Bhīma).
<div n="NI"/>(v) While the Pāṇḍavas were living in the Badarik-
āśrama waiting for the return of Arjuna who had gone
on a year's pilgrimage, Pāñcālī was carried away by
Jaṭāsura. (See under Jaṭāsura).
[Page551-b+ 64]
<div n="NI"/>(vi) After she was rescued from Jaṭāsura, Pāñcālī
along with her husbands dwelt in the hermitage of
Ārṣṭiṣeṇa. (See under Ārṣṭiṣeṇa).
<div n="NI"/>(vii) Once Draupadī gave instructions on the duties
of a wife to Satyabhāmā who came to the forests
along with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (Chapters 233 and 234, Vana
Parva).
<div n="NI"/>(viii) Once Durvāsas with his disciples came to the
forest as the guests of the Pāṇḍavas. They came late
and Pāñcālī had taken her food already. The
Akṣayapātra (the never-empty pot) could not be
invoked to produce anything that day and Pāñcālī was
greatly agitated and worried. She prayed to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
for succour and Śrī Kṛṣṇa also coming hungry searched
in the pot for something to eat and finding a bit of
spinach sticking to the sides of the pot grabbed it
with avidity and ate it. The guests felt as if they had
enjoyed a sumptuous feast and left the place well
pleased. (See para XII under Duryodhana).
<div n="NI"/>(ix) Jayadratha carried away Pāñcālī from the
forests once. The Pāṇḍavas rescued her. (Para 4 under
Jayadratha).
<div n="NI"/>6) {%Life incognito.%} After their twelve years of exile in
the forests the time for living in disguise for a year
came and Dharmaputra and his brothers with Pāñcālī
spent that period in the palace of the King Virāṭa.
Each assumed a new name and accepted different
types of service under the King. Pāñcālī took the
name of Sairandhrī and served as a companion and
attendant to the princess. One day Kīcaka, the
mighty brother-in-law of the King, tried to molest
Pāñcālī and Bhīmasena killed him. (See under
Kīcaka). It was at the time when the incognito life
was coming to an end that the Kaurava army headed
by Duryodhana carried away the cattle of the King
Virāṭa. The King was absent from the palace at that
time and the prince, Uttara, had not the guts to go
and attack the Kaurava army. It was Pāñcālī who
then suggested sending of Bṛhannala of the palace
(Arjuna) to serve as charioteer of Uttara. (See under
Arjuna, Para 24).
<div n="NI"/>7) {%Subsequent events.%} The thirteen years of life in
exile and incognito came to an end. But the Kauravas
were not prepared to give half of the kingdom to the
Pāṇḍavas. The differences between them increased and
it led to a great war. Śrī Kṛṣṇa agreed to go as a
messenger to the court of Dhṛtarāṣṭra and ask for the
share of the Pāṇḍavas. Before leaving he asked each of
the Pāṇḍavas what he should say at the court of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Pāñcālī then approached Kṛṣṇa in
private and said she desired for a war to defeat the
Kauravas. She then reminded Kṛṣṇa of a vow taken
by Bhīmasena that he would tie her hair with his
hands smeared with the blood from the thigh of
Duśśāsana.
<div n="NI"/>The peace-mission of Kṛṣṇa failed and the famous
Kurukṣetra battle started. Many valiant warriors on
both the sides were killed. When Abhimanyu was
killed Subhadrā wept bitterly and Pāñcālī who went
to console her fainted. Śrī Kṛṣṇa revived her. Pāñcālī
asked Bhīmasena to bring to her the inborn jewel on
the head of Aśvatthāmā, son of Droṇa. She wanted to
take revenge on him for killing her brother Dhṛṣṭa-
dyumna.
[Page552-a+ 65]
After a fierce battle for eighteen days the Kauravas
were defeated and their tribe annihilated. Pāṇḍavas
took hold of Hastināpura and Pāñcālī was one among
those who persuaded Dharmaputra to take charge of
the administration of the state as its ruler. Dharma-
putra performed an Aśvamedhayajña and Pāñcālī gave
presents to Citrāṅgadā and Ulūpī who were present
for the function then. After the Aśvamedha Draupadī
lived in Hastināpura serving Kuntī and Gāndhārī
alike for a long time. It was at that time that
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Gāndhārī and Kuntī went to the forests
and Draupadī expressed her desire to go along with
them to be of help to them. But they did not allow
her to do so. While the Pāṇḍavas were living in
Hastināpura as the rulers of the country eminent ṛṣis
from different parts of the country visited them and
some of the Siddhas (realised souls) among them saw
Pāñcālī as the goddess Mahālakṣmī herself. (Śloka 9,
Chapter 25, Āśramavāsika Parva).
<div n="NI"/>8) {%Death of Pāñcālī.%} At the fag end of their life the
Pāṇḍavas crowned Parīkṣit as the King of Hastināpura
and started on their Mahāprasthāna. They travelled
for long through the Himālayas and reached Mahā-
meru. At that time Pāñcālī fell down dead. Then
Bhīmasena asked Yudhiṣṭhira why without any parti-
cular ailment Pāñcālī died. Yudhiṣṭhira replied that it
was because she showed special interest in Arjuna The
Pāṇḍavas walked on and all of them excepting
Dharmaputra died on the way one by one. Even
before Dharmaputra entered svarga Pāñcālī and the
four brothers had reached there. (Chapters 1 to 4,
Mahāprasthānika Parva).
<div n="NI"/>9). {%Sons of Pāñcālī.%} Pāñcālī had five sons one each
from each of the five husbands. She got Prativindhya
of Yudhiṣṭhira, Śrutasoma of Bhīmasena, Śrutakīrti of
Arjuna, Śatānīka of Nakula and Śrutakarmā of
Sahadeva. (Śloka 73, Chapter 95, Ādi Parva).
<LEND>
