<L>4977<pc>552-b<k1>पञ्चप्राण<k2>पञ्चप्राण
PAÑCAPRĀṆAS¦. The five prāṇas (life breaths) of any
living being are Prāṇa, Apāna, Vyāna, Samāna and
Udāna. There is a story in ‘Devī Bhāgavata’ regarding
the origin of the Pañcaprāṇas.
<div n="NI"/>Once Śrī Kṛṣṇa met Rādhādevī at Rāsamaṇḍala and in
seclusion they spent in sexual sport the period of one day
of Brahmā. Then Kṛṣṇa selecting an auspicious time
dropped his vital fluid into her womb at the end of the
[Page553-a+ 65]
sexual sport. Tired by the prolonged carnal sport and
shaken by the impact of the hot semen Rādhādevī pers-
pired profusely and the exhaustion produced deep and
long breaths. The whole universe was covered with her
sweat and her sighs became the goddess of the life-giving
breaths of all created animals. From the left side of
goddess was born Vāyupatnī and to her were born the
Pañcaprāṇas. Besides these, another five younger prāṇas
were also born. From the sweat of the Devī was born
Varuṇa and from the left side of Varuṇa was born
Varuṇānī. (9th Skandha, Devī Bhāgavata).
<div n="NI"/>Māṇḍūkyopanisad gives the following details regarding
the working of the Prāṇas in the body:—Prāṇa was
first used in the sense of breath. Later it got the mean-
ing of life. Life is in fact breath to all living beings. Only
when a man is awake, his mind and sense organs
are active. But Prāṇa is active always both in the state
of wakefulness and sleep. Therefore Prāṇa is the vigour
of life. It may be said that when a man is asleep his
senses merge with his mind and his mind with the
prāṇa. The five factors of Prāṇa are the Pañcaprāṇas.
The first of the five is called Prāṇa itself. It is called
Mukhyaprāṇa or chief Prāṇa. Just as a King appoints
his ministers at different places to do specified jobs the
chief Prāṇa posts the other prāṇas at different parts in
the body with specific purposes of their own. Prāṇa is
seated in the heart and does the work of breathing.
Apāna is seated in anus and directs the organs of
excretion of the body. Vyāna is spread throughout the
body and it is this life-wind which keeps one alive even
when breathing is stopped for some time. When an
archer stands in deep concentration with his bent bow
without breathing he lives with the help of Vyāna.
Samāna controls the breathing-in and breathing-out to
a specified rhythm. Samāna (equaliser) is so called
because it balances the force of the in-coming and out-
going breaths. There is a school of thought that Prāṇa
is not seated in the heart but spread over the ears, eyes
nose and face. Samāna is seated at the navel midway
between the seats of Prāṇa and Apāna. This is also a
reason why life wind got that name. This breath does
the work of prompting digestion. The four prāṇas,
Prāṇa, Apāna, Samāna and Vyāna sustain life. The
fifth one, Udāna, takes the soul of the being out of
the body when it dies.
<LEND>
