<L>4983<pc>553-b<k1>पञ्चतन्त्र<k2>पञ्चतन्त्र
PAÑCATANTRA¦.
<div n="NI"/>A. {%General information.%} An ancient book of distinction
written by the scholar Viṣṇuśarmā in the form of
stories for the use of children to give them an idea of
the different aspects of life.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Origin.%} There is a statement in the preface itself
regarding the composition of this book: “Three sons
were born to an emperor named Amaraśakti. All the
three were dull-witted. The emperor was very sorry
for them but found no way to improve them. Greatly
disappointed the King called the royal council and
told them about his sons. Then one of the members of
the council, a man named Sumati, stood up and said
“Oh best of Kings, let us not try to teach your children
the śāstras one by one. It will not only be unpleasant
study but would also take a long time to complete.
If we can mix all the śāstras cleverly and make it palat-
able like sweetmeats the children would take it
easily. There is a suitable man also for this work in our
state. He is Viṣṇuśarmā, a kind-hearted scholar who
is not only well-versed in all the sāstras but also an
adept in the art of the up-bringing of children. I am
sure he would make your children wise and learned.”
When the emperor heard this he sent for Viṣṇuśarmā
and told him everything. After understanding well the
nature of his would-be disciples and the ambition of
their father, Viṣṇuśarmā took charge of his wards and
within six months he taught the sons of the emperor
the science of government. The stories which he used
to teach them the science of administration were all
compiled into a volume called Pañcatantra.”
<div n="NI"/>2) {%A general idea of the book.%} The book contains five
divisions each division illustrating one tantra (tact,
diplomacy) by several stories. It contains prose and
verse. The first tantra is called Mitrabheda. Stories
under this head explain the philosophy of “Divide
and rule” in politics. The main characters in these
stories are two foxes named Karaṭaka and Damanaka.
Stories under Mitrabheda relate to how these sly foxes
enjoy themselves in breaking the intimacy between a
lion and an ox using slander against each other.
‘Mitralābha’ is the theme of the next tantra. It is an
advice that you should select your friends with
care selecting them only after studying them in detail
properly. The author has selected as characters in
his stories for this purpose a tortoise a deer, a crow
and a rat. The third tantra is called Kākolūkīya. This
deals with the evils behind an intimacy between born
enemies. The main characters in the stories relating
[Page554-a+ 65]
to this are a crow and an owl. The fourth tantra is
called Labdhapraṇāśa. It describes how a man loses
what has come into his possession by his foolishness. A
monkey and a crocodile are the characters in this story.
The fifth tantra is Aparīkṣitakāraka. It deals with the
bad side of not looking into all the possible aspects of
what you hear. Several stories are there to illustrate
this point.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Popularity of the book.%} Though no correct records
are there in history in support of the belief, it is believ-
ed that Amaraśakti was the ruler of Mahilāropya in
Deccan and that Pañcatantra must have originated
from there. But Pañcatantra received a global publicity
and popularity and was translated from Sanskrit into
many other languages. Directed by King Kosru Anu-
ṣirva, a Persian poet named Buryoe translated it into
the Persian language during the period 531-575 A.D.
That translation is not available at present. In the year
570 A.D. it was translated into the Syrian language by
a poet named Bud. A scholar named Abdulla Ibaal
Mogaffa in the year 750 A. D. translated it into the
Arabic language. It was from this Arabic translation that
it was translated into many European languages. The
Greek translation appeared in the year 1080 A.D.,
Hebrew in 1100 A.D., Latin in 1270 A.D., German in
1480 A.D., Italian in 1582 A.D. and French in 1678
A.D. Next to the Bible this is the book which has
received the greatest publicity and popularity. The
great linguist Hertel says that Pañcatantra has appeared
in about 200 translations in fifty different languages.
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Period of composition.%} Because the translation into
the Syrian language appeared in the year 570 A.D it
must have been composed earlier than that date. Again,
since it takes at least two centuries for a work to get
popular enough to be translated into a foreign language,
the composition must have been done early in the fourth
century A.D. Some believe that the work was done in
Kashmir. While others assert that it was written in
Magadha. The original title of the book is believed to
be ‘Karataka and Damanaka’ by a few.
<div n="NI"/>5) {%Two editions.%} Two different editions of the book are
now found. One edition popular in Kashmir is known
as Tantrākhyāyikā. The other is in the form found in
Kathāsaritsāgara and Bṛhatkathāmañjarī. The original
Sanskrit work is very rarely found. There are
several editions of this in Dakṣiṇa Bhārata. Changes in
the stories according to the change of times are also
noted. (History of Classical Sanskrit Literature).
<div n="NI"/>B. {%Contents (Stories).%}
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Mitrabheda.%} There was once a very good merchant
in the land of Mahilāropya called Vardhamāna. He
was once travelling in a bullock-cart. One of the
bullocks drawing the cart was named Sañjīvaka. The
leg of Sañjīvaka broke on the way striking against a
stone. Leaving the bullock to the charge of four of his
attendants Vardhamāna continued his journey. When
night came the attendants were frightened by the
surrounding forests and so, leaving the bullock to its
fate the attendants left the place. The bullock got well
and it roamed about in the forests bellowing loudly.
The King of the forests, Piṅgalaka the lion, was
frightened by the bellowing of the bullock.
<div n="NI"/>The lion remained in the forest without stirring out
from its cave. The minister of the lion was a fox. That
fox had two sons named Karaṭaka and Damanaka.
[Page554-b+ 65]
Damanaka wanted to know what made the lion worried
and told his brother about it. Karaṭaka advised him
not to interfere unnecessarily with the affairs of others
and told his brother Damanaka a story to stress his
point.
<div n="NI"/>A group of sawers were sawing wood near a temple
for its construction. At lunch time one of the sawers
placed a wedge on a half-sawn timber and went for
his midday meal. One of the monkeys sitting on the
branch of a tree near the temple jumped on to the half-
sawn timber and pulled out the wedge. His tail had
fallen without his knowing into the space between
the sawn planks and when the monkey later jumped
out from the timber his tail was wedged between the
planks and the tail got crushed. If you poke your nose
into the affairs of others without any purpose such
dangers are sure to happen.
<div n="NI"/>Hearing that, Damanaka said, “Brother, are we serving
the lion, our master, just for our food? If we want only
our food what difference is there between ourselves and
the dog? Have you not seen the uproar the dogs
make when they see food. A dog has no modesty,
humility or self-confidence. Some men are also like that.
But some others are not like that. Look at the elephant.
It never makes an exhibition of its happiness when it
gets its food. Its majestic stand, look and gestures are
worth noticing. The best of men are also like this.
Everybody should keep this in mind. He who earns his
livelihood without depending on others but does it by
his own wits and efforts is the most revered of men.
But food is not enough, we must earn fame also.
So even though we are children we must try to remove
the worry that hangs over our lord, the lion.”
The brother was not moved by this philosophy of
Damanaka and so he said again, “Anywhere and in any
venture success is difficult to achieve and failure is very
easy. It is difficult to rise up but it is easy to fall down.
It is a very hard labour to roll a stone up a mountain
but to push it down from the top is very easy. He is
blessed who can read correctly the thoughts of other
people. I have, looking at the face of our King, under-
stood that something big is worrying him.”
<div n="NI"/>Karaṭaka said, “Admitting what you say to be correct
how are we to know the thing that worries the King?
It is a dangerous task.” Damanaka said “Regarding the
achievement of success, there are three kinds of people
namely the Uttama (best), the madhyama (mediocre)
and the adhama (worst). The adhama type will never
start a venture fearing failure. The madhyama type
would start his endeavour but would turn back at the
sight of obstacles. But the Uttama type would never
turn back without achieving success. They are the
adorable type of men in this world. The Uttama
would act according to the circumstances of the situa-
tion. If he wants to talk to another and obtain a favour
from him he would not go to him at random without
looking into the time, place and opportunity to do so.
Even Bṛhaspati has his moods. In fact, there is nothing
impossible in this world. Disappointment and failures
are due to want of experience and lack of endeavour.
The great ocean with its huge rolling waves gives one
a fright at first sight. But if he starts bathing in it for
a long time he finds it not so unapproachable or
ghastly.”
<div n="NI"/>When Karaṭaka heard these moral preachings of his
[Page555-a+ 65]
brother he allowed him to do what he wanted to do.
Damanaka went to the cave of the lion. Far from the
cave itself Damanaka started walking humbly with his
head bent down. The lion saw Damanaka walking
thus to him and was immensely pleased. The King of
the beasts asked him thus “Damanaka, it is a long time
since I saw you and your brother. Why is it that you
both, sons of my minister, do not come and see me as
often as your father?”
<div n="NI"/>Damanaka replied very humbly “Oh mighty King, of
what use can we insignificant creatures be to you? Yet,
if one thinks over it, even little things can also be of use
at times to great people.” Damanaka then recited to the
King a poem which in substance was thus: “Even grass
over which we trample while walking, is of use as fodder
to the cattle. Some are used for cleaning the teeth and
still some, dry and brittle, to tickle the ear when it
itches badly. Great men retain their greatness even
when they fall. A burning torch would send its flame only
upwards even when you keep it upside down. Similarly
all things will shine only in their proper places. An
ornamental waistbelt would not shine round a neck nor
would bangles shine on one's ears. Anyhow let me ask
your highness one question. Is it true that when your
highness went to drink water something happened to
make your highness worry ?”
<div n="NI"/>Piṅgalaka the lion said: “What you say is correct. When
I went today to drink water in the river I heard the
horrifying bellow of a fierce animal and was frightened.
I am thinking of leaving this forest and going to some
other one.”
<div n="NI"/>Damanaka said “Oh Lord, be not frightened. Appear-
ances are often deceptive and cannot be believed. I
shall tell you the story of a fox who mistook an ordinary
drum for an animal with good flesh. Once a fox saw
a drum lying in a battlefield. It was making a sound
when the wind blew over it. The fox mistook it for an
animal with plenty of flesh and blood. Rejoicing at the
prospect of having a hearty meal the fox mustered
courage and went near it. It tore the leather open. Only
then could it understand its blunder.”
<div n="NI"/>The King liked the story very much. So he sent
Damanaka to enquire where the bellow came from.
Damanaka found out Sañjīvaka, the ox and told him
everything and added that he had been sent by the
King to fetch him to his presence. Sañjīvaka was at first
afraid to go but the consoling words of Damanaka
gave him courage and it went to the lion. The lion and
the ox became great friends and gradually the intimacy
developed to such an extent that the King of the beasts
started becoming indifferent to the welfare of the other
beasts in the forest. The subjects of the King Piṅgalaka
were in trouble.
<div n="NI"/>Feeling sorry for his own actions Damanaka went to his
brother and said, “All this happened because of our own
fault. I shall tell you a story about a self-made calamity.
Once an ascetic named Devaśarmā was afraid of
robbers. So he stitched into his robes all the money he
possessed. Somehow a robber named Āṣāḍhabhūti came
to know of it and he made friends with the ascetic and
acted as his servant pretending to be very faithful.
Devaśarmā got confidence in him and one day he went
to bathe handing over all his guarded wealth into the
hands of Āṣāḍhabhūti. On his way back from the river
after his bath Devaśarmā saw two goats fighting against
[Page555-b+ 65]
each other. Blood was flowing from the heads of both
the goats and still the fight continued. A fox came
there to drink the fresh blood flowing from their heads
and he went and started licking the blood that had
dropped between the two fighting goats. The goats
came again and hit against each other with force and
the fox that was standing between the two and licking
the blood greedily was crushed to death. When he
returned after witnessing the fight the ascetic found
that his servant had gone away with his cash.”
<div n="NI"/>Karaṭaka liked the story very much. They then discuss-
ed ways and means of getting out of this calamity.
Damanaka said that any object can be achieved by
cleverness and told his brother a story to illustrate his
point. He said “Once a crow made his abode on a tree
with his wife and children. After some time his wife
began to lay eggs but all of them disappeared one by
one. They made enquiries and found that the culprit
was a big cobra living beneath the same tree. They
were no match to the cobra and so they sought the
advice of their friend, a fox.
<div n="NI"/>The fox said, “I shall suggest a way to get out of the
danger. Have you not heard the story of an old stork
who got his food by his cleverness? The stork went to
the banks of a pond feeling hungry. There were plenty
of fishes in the pond. The stork stood still on the banks
pretending to be sad. A crab seeing the sad-looking
stork came and enquired the cause of his grief. The
stork said ‘You well know that we storks live on flesh.
and fish. I now understand that a fisherman has planned
to catch all the fish in this pond. This is the cause of
my worry.” The fishes who overheard this conver-
sation between the crab and the stork came before the
stork frightened and requested him to save them from
the fisherman somehow. The stork said ‘I am not strong
to fight the fisherman. But I can do what little help
I can give you. I shall every day remove you one by one
from this pond to another one without the knowledge
of the fisherman.”
<div n="NI"/>The poor fishes agreed to the proposal and the stork
carried away one fish everyday from the pond and ate
it at a place hidden from the view of the others. This
went on for one or two months without break and
somehow the crab got suspicious and he requested the
stork to take him also to the other pond. The stork
carrying the crab reached its usual place and the crab
was horrified at the sight of the bones of the fishes
eaten before by the stork. The crab knew its death
was sure even if it did not fight with the stork and so
started a fight and in the end killed the stork by
crushing the neck of the stork.”
<div n="NI"/>The crows crew hilariously when they heard the
story of the fox. The fox then told them a plan.
“When any of those who come to bathe in a pond near-
by removes the necklace and places it on the shore you
are to pick it up and hang it on a branch of the tree.”
The crows did like that and pedestrians going that way
saw the necklace hanging from the branch and took it
after killing the cobra in the hole beneath the tree.”
<div n="NI"/>On hearing the story told by Damanaka the idea of
putting the lion against the ox gained strength in
Karaṭaka's mind. To confirm the idea in his brother's
mind Damanaka told another story. Damanaka said.
“Once there was a lion named Madotkaṭa. He lived
in a forest harassing all the beasts that lived there.
[Page556-a+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>All the subjects of King Madotkaṭa joined together,
went to him and represented to him that they would
go to his cave one by one every day to be killed and
eaten by him. The lion agreed to that and the beasts
one by one went to his cave each day. One day it was
the turn of a clever hare. The hare walked slowly and
reached the lion's den late. The King was very cross
at this and asked him to explain why he was late. The
hare said “Oh lord, on my way another lion accosted
me and I had to take a round-about route to get away
from that lion.” The lion got angry and asked the
hare to take him to the other lion who dared to come
to that forest and question his authority. The hare
took the lion to a well and asked his lord to peep in.
When Madotkaṭa did so he saw his own reflection in
the still waters of the well and mistook it for another
lion. It jumped into the well and was killed.”
<div n="NI"/>Karaṭaka had implicit confidence in Damanaka after
hearing all these stories and he sent his brother to the
King to create a rupture between the lion and the ox.
Damanaka went to the King Piṅgalaka and apologised
for the mistake he had committed. Then the King
enquired what the mistake was. Damanaka said that
the ox Sañjīvaka was not such a simpleton as he took
him to be. He was ambitious and wanted to snatch
away the kingdom from Piṅgalaka. It was unwise to
keep one single minister always. “After all what can an
ox do? He can plough the fields. I have come to
inform you all these out of my regard for you.”
Damanaka said.
<div n="NI"/>Even after hearing all these, Piṅgalaka did not have
the heart to abandon the ox. Piṅgalaka asked what a
poor bullock could do against a lion. Damanaka then
said that one would come into grief if one believed too
much in any body. “Have you not heard the story of
the louse which believed the bug?” Damanaka asked.
Then he narrated a story. “Mandavisarpiṇī was a
louse which was living happily on the silken bed of a
King. A bug went there and made friends with the
louse. The poor louse believed the bug to be harmless
and allowed it to stay that night with him. The
bug said that it was very greedy to suck the blood of
the King. At night the bug bit the King. The King
woke up and ordered his servants to search for the
thing that bit him. When lights were brought the
clever bug slipped away. The royal servants conduct-
ing the search found out the louse and killed it.”
<div n="NI"/>The lion liked the tale very much and yet was reluc-
tant to dismiss the ox. The lion wanted proof that
the ox was at fault. So Damanaka went straight to the
ox in his house and said “We are all small people.
What does the master do for our welfare? If small
people seek the friendship of big people the small ones
will always suffer.” The ox endorsed the view and told
a story to illustrate the truth. “A lion named Madot-
kaṭa had a tiger, a fox and a crow as his ministers.
When the ministers were once walking in the forest
they saw a camel. They had never seen a camel before
and so they were wonderstruck by the animal. They
went and talked with it and gathered that the curious
animal was a camel which had been carrying loads for
a merchant. It had now escaped from the merchant
because of the heavy work it had to do. The camel
wanted to remain in hiding. The ministers took the
new animal to the lion. The lion liked the camel very
[Page556-b+ 65]
much and soon they became good and intimate friends.
The intimacy increased and soon the King lost all
interest in his other subjects. At this stage the minis-
ters found out a plan. They advised the King to kill
and eat the camel but the King refused to do so. Then
the crow went before the King and requested the lion
to kill and eat it. But the crow was so small a food for
the lion and so it refused to kill the crow. Then the
fox made a similar offer but the lion refused to kill the
fox also. Then came the tiger with the offer and the
lion refused to kill the tiger also. Seeing all this the
camel also made a similar offer and the moment his
consent was out from his mouth the fox and the tiger
together killed the poor camel and ate it. So one
should be careful in believing others. In my case I
am sure some wicked persons must have advised him
against me and that is the reason why the lion is
angry with me. But I will always work true to my con-
science. There is no harm in fighting either for self-
protection or for destroying one's enemies. So if it is
necessary I will fight the lion.”
<div n="NI"/>Hearing this Damanaka said “To go to war with-
out knowing the strength of the enemy is wrong. Once
upon a time a water-fowl quarrelled with the ocean.
The water-fowl was living happily on the shores of an
ocean with his mate. They ate the worms that lived
on the shores. The she-fowl got pregnant and when it
was time to lay her eggs she asked her mate to show her
a safe place to lay the eggs. The male mate asked her
to lay the eggs on the shore itself. But the she-fowl
said that the waves would carry away the eggs and so
it was not wise to do so. The male fowl assured her that
the ocean was not bold enough to do anything against
his interests. But the she-fowl still hesitated.
<div n="NI"/>Then the male fowl said “I am the nearest relative res-
ponsible for your protection and welfare. If one does not
heed the words of a relative one will fall into danger.
I shall tell you the story of a tortoise which came to
grief by not obeying the instructions of its friends. In
olden times there lived on the banks of a pond a tor-
toise who had two swan-friends in the lake named
Saṅkaṭa and Vikaṭa. Once the lake became empty of
water and the swans decided to go to another lake with
water. They never wanted to part with their friend the
tortoise and so decided to take the tortoise also along
with them. But the tortoise could not fly and so
they found a plan to carry the tortoise to the other lake.
They brought a stick and the tortoise was asked to hang
at the middle of the stick clutching the stick tightly
with its teeth. The swans then took the stick by its
two ends each holding one end in its beak. The swans
gave strict instructions that the tortoise should not open
its mouth and then rose up into the air and flew
towards the other lake. On the way some children saw
the funny sight in the air and so hooted and howled.
The tortoise got angry and abused the children. The
moment it opened its mouth it lost hold on the stick
and fell down to the ground This happened because the
tortoise did not heed the words of its friends.” The
water fowl continued ‘It is cowardice and foolishness to
remain sad expecting dangers in future. Just hear this
story’ he said ‘Once in a pond there were three fishes
named Anāgata, Utpannamati and Yadbhaviṣya. Hear-
ing that fishermen were coming to fish in that pond
Anāgata warned them and suggested going to another
[Page557-a+ 65]
pond to escape from the fishermen. But Utpannamati
and Yadbhaviṣya did not care. They said that some
plan could be found out when the danger came. But
Anāgata felt diffident and so he went away to another
pond. Soon the fishermen came and spread their nets.
Utpannamati lay still pretending to be dead. The
fishermen took it and deposited it on the shore and
started to fish again. The moment the fishermen turned
their heads Utpannamati slipped into a mud pit nearby
and remained there till the departure of the fishermen.
But poor Yadbhaviṣya could not think of any plan and
so was caught and carried away by the fishermen. So
just like Utpannamati I will also come across some plan
when the danger comes and so you do lay your eggs
on the shore of the ocean itself.”
<div n="NI"/>Hearing the assuring words of her husband the she-
fowl laid her eggs on the shore. But very soon waves
came and carried them away. She complained to her
husband. The water fowl called a conference of all the
birds living there and explained to them his mishap
and all of them went on a deputation to Garuḍa, the
best of the birds and requested him to find out a re-
medy. Garuḍa represented the matter to Mahāviṣṇu
who in turn called Varuṇa to his side and ordered him
to give back the eggs to the fowl.
<div n="NI"/>After telling this story Damanaka went to the lion and
told him many misleading lies about the ox. Gradually
the lion and the ox became enemies. Damanaka then
triumphantly went and informed his brother Karaṭaka
of his achievement. But Karaṭaka said “Brother, you
have done a very unjust thing. There are four methods
to achieve your object namely, Sāma, Dāna, Bheda
and Daṇḍa. Of these Bheda is to be used only last of
all. I shall tell you a story:
<div n="NI"/>Once a chetty (Merchant) had two sons named Dharma-
buddhi and Duṣṭabuddhi. Once they were both travel-
ling through a forest when Dharmabuddhi got a trea-
sure from a hole at the base of a big tree. Duṣṭabuddhi
advised his brother not to take the treasure to the city
as it was dangerous to do so and made him bury it at
a place beneath the same tree. That night itself
Duṣṭabuddhi went and dug out the treasure and got it
buried in his own room. After some days both of them
went together to see the treasure and found the place
empty of the treasure. They accused each other of
stealing the treasure. Both of them complained to the
King. The King asked them whether they had any
witnesses and they replied that only the tree was there
as a witness. The King decided that both of them should
go beneath the same tree and dip their hands in burning
oil to prove their innocence. Duṣṭabuddhi went to his
father and requested him that he should hide in the
hollow of that tree and say that it was Dharmabuddhi
who had stolen the treasure. Hearing this the father
said “Child, when you think of a trick you must also
think of the danger involved in it. Once there lived a
stork with his wife on a tree. A serpent living in the same
tree began to eat the young ones of the stork and the
stork complained to his friend fox about it. The clever
fox suggested to him a plan. There was a mongoose
living near the tree. The stork was to drop fishes in
front of the hole of the mongoose and continue
dropping fishes in a line leading to the abode of the
serpent. The mongoose would thus be led to the hole
of the serpent. The stork did so and when the mongoose
[Page557-b+ 65]
reached the hole of the serpent it saw it and killed it.
I cannot do such cruel things.” But when Duṣṭabuddhi
insisted, the father half-heartedly agreed to it and went
and sat in the hollow of the tree. Next day the servants
of the King came to the foot of the tree with burning
oil. They asked the tree to tell the truth regarding
the theft. Then there came a voice from the tree denounc-
ing Dharmabuddhi as the culprit. Dharmabuddhi then
said there was no truth in the bodiless voice and request-
ed them to fumigate the tree from beneath. The royal
servants did so and then the father came out and con-
fessed everything. The servants of the King nailed
Duṣṭabuddhi on a spike and killed him.
<div n="NI"/>After having told the story Karaṭaka tried to dissuade
his brother from his deceitful intentions. Karaṭaka
said:—“Piṅgala and Sañjīvaka are kind-hearted and
simple people. There need be no treachery with them.
Treachery is allowed against wicked people. I shall tell
you the story of a merchant:—
<div n="NI"/>This merchant had as his entire wealth a thousand
pounds of iron and one day he went on a pilgrimage
after entrusting his entire wealth to a friend and
neighbour of his on the understanding that the latter
should return it on his return after the pilgrimage.
After ten months the merchant returned but the friend
did not give back the iron. He regretted that all the
iron was eaten by rats in which his house abounded.
The merchant knew that his neighbour was speaking
falsehood but kept silent over the matter. After a few
days the merchant somehow enticed the only son of his
neighbour to his house and locked the young boy in a
room. The friend went in search of his son to the
merchant's house and asked him whether he had seen
his son anywhere. The merchant replied that he saw
the boy being carried away by a kite. The friend could
not believe the story and suspecting some foul play on
the part of the merchant went to the king and reported
the matter to him. The king sent for the merchant and
asked him about the missing boy. The merchant gave
the king the same reply he gave his friend. The king
was surprised and asked the merchant whether it was
believable that a boy aged eighteen would be carried
away by a kite. The merchant very coolly replied that
such things could happen in a country where rats could
eat a thousand pounds of iron. The king asked the
merchant to explain and he then told him everything
that had happened. The king ordered the friend to
return the iron and the merchant got back his wealth.
Karaṭaka after telling this story added that deceit in
return for deceit was no sin. Damanaka stuck on to
his plan and made the lion and ox fight each other. The
poor ox was killed and the lion became his old self
again.
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Suhṛllābha. (Gaining friends).%} Once there lived on
a tree a crow named Laghupatanaka. The crow saw a
hunter coming and spreading a net beneath the tree.
A flock of doves coming that way was caught in the net.
But the doves flew up in a body and the net was
carried from the ground freed of the pegs that held it.
The crow followed them and when they were safely
landed at another place Citragrīva the leader of the
doves, told the crow thus “I shall now show you the
benefit of gaining friends.” Citragrīva and his doves flew
again with the net and landed before the hole of a rat
named Hiraṇyaka. The rat was a friend of Citragrīva.
[Page558-a+ 65]
On hearing the voice of Citragrīva outside, Hiraṇyaka
came out and felt sorry for the plight of the doves. The
rat pointed out that nobody could oppose fate and
proved it with illustrations. He added:—“Though
elephants and cobras are mightier and fiercer than men,
it is because of fate that they are being controlled by
smaller people than they themselves. Hiraṇyaka cut
to pieces the threads of the net and set the doves free.
Next day the doves flew away to their places. Seeing
the generosity shown by the rat, the crow wanted to
be friendly with the rat. The crow mentioned this to
the rat. But the rat refused to be friendly thinking that
it was a ruse to get him killed for his food. But the
crow promised to be grateful for ever to the rat for
saving the doves which belonged to the community of
birds to which the crow also belonged. But the rat
retorted that gratitude was a quality which was absent
in any living being and generally harm was the reward
for any favour done. The crow was greatly grieved to
hear the words of Hiraṇyaka and told him that he
(crow) would commit suicide if the rat did not take
him as his friend. At last the rat took pity on the
crow and they became friends. Time passed on and then
there broke out a famine in the land. The crow decided
to shift his abode and told the rat about it. He said
he was going to a lake on the banks of which lived a
friend of his, a tortoise. The tortoise, he added, would
fetch for him from the lake plenty of fish to eat. The
rat was also affected by the famine and so he also decid-
ed to accompany the crow. The crow took the rat
in its beak and they both reached the lake where lived
the tortoise named Manthara. The crow introduced
Hiraṇyaka to the tortoise and the tortoise asked him
the reason why he left his previous abode.
<div n="NI"/>The rat said:—“There was a bhikṣu (one who lives on
alms) named Cūḍākarṇa living in a house in my place.
He used to eat only what was required to maintain
life in him. He would cook his own food and keep the
remains everyday in his kitchen. I used to eat that
food and live. Then one day another Sannyāsin named
Bṛhatsphik (Vīṇākarṇa) came to this house. Every
night Vīṇākarṇa used to read the Purāṇas to Cūdā-
karṇa. Cūḍākarṇa would sit and make a sound on the
bow kept nearby to drive me away. The first time he
did so Vīṇākarṇa who was reading resented the
interrupting sound and asked Cūḍākarṇa why he made
it. He then explained that it was intended to drive
away the rat coming to steal the food. I was forced to
starve and I became lean and weak. Even rivers would
go dry if there are no rains. Only those with wealth
would have friends. Begging is a nuisance to others.
Everywhere it is important to acquire good and faith-
ful friends. When a good man is in danger only good
men rush to help him. When an elephant falls into a
pit it is always another elephant which comes to its
rescue. Therefore I desire to make friends with you.”
<div n="NI"/>All the three, the crow, the rat and the tortoise lived
together happily. Then one day a deer named Citrāṅ-
gada escaping from a hunter came frightened to their
midst and started living with them. One day the deer
which went in search of food did not return even after
dusk and so the crow went in search of the deer and
found it trapped in a hunter's net. The crow informed
the rat about it and the rat immediately came and
started gnawing at the strings of the net. In the mean-
[Page558-b+ 65]
time the tortoise desirous of knowing the plight of
Citrāṅgada crawled to the place of accident. The rat
had already torn to pieces the net and the crow and
the rat said that it was unwise of Manthara to have
come so far crawling as there was danger from the
hunter coming to the place soon. Before the deer
could endorse the views of his friends the hunter came
to the scene. The deer, the crow and the rat escaped.
The hunter saw the crawling tortoise and caught it.
Binding it with a string the hunter placed it on the
ground. In the meantime the friends of Manthara who
had escaped hit upon a plan to rescue the tortoise.
The deer lay down pretending to be dead at a place
far away from the place but within the sight of the
hunter. The crow sat perched on its body as if pecking
at its flesh. The hunter saw it and went to take the
dead body of the deer. The moment the hunter turned
away from the tortoise the rat went and cut the string
binding the tortoise and set it free. Before the hunter
reached the deer it ran away. So all were saved. This
is the benefit of having good friends.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Sandhivigraha (Peace and war).%} We must make
friends with people only after knowing them well
There was once a big banyan tree in a forest which
was inhabited by many crows. Their leader was a
crow named Meghavarṇa About three kilometres away
from this tree was another banyan tree on which lived
a number of owls. Their leader was an owl named
Amardana. The crows and the owls were great
enemies.
<div n="NI"/>One day Amardana king of the owls with a large army
of a lakh of his subjects attacked the crows at night.
The crows could not see at night and so all the crows
excepting a few of the top ones were killed. Megha-
varṇa, the king, and his ministers, Uddīpaka, Sandīpaka,
Anudīpaka and Cirañjīvī and a few other subjects were
the only ones who escaped from there somehow. They
sat in council at a place and thought of the ways and
means to wreak vengeance on the owls. Uddīpaka said
that when the strength of the enemy was great it was
advisable to move away to another place, or to seek
the aid of mighty people or to surrender to the enemy.
It was the nature of dogs to leave one's place and go
to another place, Sandīpaka said. Others also were
of the same opinion. Cirañjīvī alone did not express
any opinion and so the king asked him why he was
sitting silent.
<div n="NI"/>Cirañjīvī said:—“Oh King, we became enemies of
the owls because of our bad tongue. I shall tell you
the story of an ass which met with its death because of its
bad words. Once a washerman had a donkey to carry
his load of clothes to and fro. The poor washerman
did not have sufficient earnings to feed the donkey well
and so he let it loose to go and eat of its own accord to
appease its hunger. The donkey started going to the
fields of other people and eating their grains. People
started hurting the donkey and so the washerman did a
clever thing. He covered the donkey with the hide of
a tiger and let it loose. People mistook it for a tiger
and did not dare to go near and hurt it. Then one day
a farmer keeping watch over the fields at night felt
suspicious of the fake tiger and covering himself with a
blanket and with a bow and arrow in his hand stealthi-
ly approached the donkey. The poor donkey mistook
the farmer for a she-donkey and brayed and approached
[Page559-a+ 64]
him with amorous movements of its body. The farmer
knew from its voice that it was a donkey and so
removed his disguise and stood before the donkey. The
be-fooled donkey got angry and abused the farmer
using very vulgar language. The farmer got angry and
killed him with an arrow.
<div n="NI"/>Cirañjīvī continued:—Once upon a time a few birds
joined together and decided to elect their leader. The
owl was the bird selected to lead them. An aged crow
condemned it. The crow said; “Are you making this
ugly bird which is blind all day your leader? If only
you make a worthy creature your leader you will be
respected. I shall tell you a story to illustrate my
point.” He then narrated the following story:
<div n="NI"/>Once upon a time there came a period of twelve
continuous years without any rain at all on the earth.
Wells, ponds, lakes and rivers were all empty. A huge
herd of elephants walking in the forests represented to
its leader the grave situation and the leader sent
messengers to all sides to find out watering places with
water. One of the messengers came back and reported
that he had found out a beautiful lake full of water and
that on its banks lived a number of hares. The elephants
immediately went to that place and started enjoying
swimming and bathing in the waters of the lake.
Many rabbits on the bank of the lake died when trodden
upon by the elephants. The aggrieved rabbits sat in
a council to consider the steps to be taken to stop this
deadly nuisance of the elephants. One of the hares,
Vijaya by name, promised to handle the matter by
himself. He knew it would be unwise to go anywhere
near the elephants. So Vijaya climbed on to the top
of a hill near the lake and when he saw the elephants
coming to the lake as usual hailed them from the top
of the hillock. When the elephants turned their heads
to the place from where the sound came they saw a
hare speaking to them. The hare bawled out thus: “We
are all servants of Candra, the moon-god. This lake
has been given to us by him. Candra Bhagavān has
deputed me to verify a report which has reached him
that some elephants are making the water of the lake
muddy. He will surely be cross with you if you again
enter the lake. So it is better for you to go away from
this place.” The elephants were frightened and they
all left the place. Cirañjīvī added that this happened
to the elephants because of the lack of a wise and
proper leader.
<div n="NI"/>The aged Cirañjīvī continued: “It is unwise to place
confidence in small people. I had an experience. Near
my abode on a tree there lived a bird called Kapiñjala.
We became friends. One day Kapiñjala did not come
home as usual. Taking advantage of it a rabbit came
to Kapiñjala's abode and started living there. I did not
like it and I told the rabbit about it. But the rabbit
did not mind it. After four or five days Kapiñjala
returned home and on finding a rabbit in his nest got
angry and asked him to leave the place. The rabbit
refused to go and an argument ensued. The rabbit said
that lakes, rivers and trees were for all and did not
belong to any particular individual. “He who is in
possession of it is its owner,” the rabbit argued. So they
decided to take the case for arbitration and for that
purpose approached a cat named Dadhikarṇa doing
penance on the banks of the river Yamunā, I followed
[Page559-b+ 64]
them curious to know the decision of the ascetic cat.
They did not see me. Both of them on approaching
him started presenting their case before the cat. The
cat pretended to be deaf and asked both of them to
come nearer and talk into his ears. They moved
nearer and the cat caught hold of them both and ate
them. Those poor beings lost their lives by placing too
much confidence in the aged cat. That is why I say
that we should not select a small being like an owl as
our leader.
<div n="NI"/>On hearing the story of the crow the birds withdrew
from their first decision of selecting an owl as their
leader. The owl was offended and felt insulted and
roared that his community would one day wreak
vengeance on the crows. A wound made by an arrow
would heal in due course and a tree would grow even
if its branches are cut but any wound on the pride of
an individual is never healed.
<div n="NI"/>Cirañjīvī continued:—“This is how the crows and owls
became enemies. We have to fight the owls. It is im-
possible to serve mean people. I shall tell you a story
of what would happen if one believes in mean people:—
Once a brahmin decided to perform a Yāga to increase
the prosperity of the land.
<div n="NI"/>He wanted a goat for the same and some
wicked young people knew that he was going to buy
one. They worked out a plan to deceive the poor
brahmin. They sat hiding at different places on the way
the brahmin was returning with the goat. As he came near
the first of the wicked young men accosted the brahmin
and asked him where he was taking the dog. The
brahmin was surprised that the young man mistook his
goat for dog and went his way. When he walked some
distance more the second of the group came to him and
put the same question. This time the brahmin was a
bit perplexed that two people should have put the same
question which he thought was absurd. When a third
man put this question again he became worried and
when this same question was repeated two more times
the brahmin got mad and left the goat on the road and
went his way. The wicked youngsters took the goat
cooked it and ate it.
<div n="NI"/>After narrating several such stories and maxims Cirañ-
jīvī said he would lead the owls into a trap and come
back. Cirañjīvī then went to the owls and their friends
on the top of Ṛṣyaśṛṅga.
<div n="NI"/>Cirañjīvī shaved his head and smearing the blood of the
dead crows on his body went and sat alone on a branch
of their former abode, the banyan tree. When night
came the owls came and surrounded the tree. Cirañjīvī
made some pitiable groans and the owls took him before
their king. The king questioned Cirañjīvī and he said
thus:—
<div n="NI"/>“I am Cirañjīvī the minister of Meghavarṇa. Once
I praised your greatness before my king and he
shaved my head and dismissed me from his service.” The
king of the owls asked his ministers what should be
done with Cirañjīvī. The minister of the king of
owls, Baka, immediately jumped from his seat and said:
<div n="NI"/>“Once a fox went to steal the cow of a brahmin. On his
way he met a Brahmarākṣasa and they became friends.
The Brahmarākṣasa was going to kill and eat the brah-
min. Both exchanged their ideas and when they reached
the gate of the house of the brahmin the fox said he
[Page560-a+ 65]
would go first and eat the goat. But the Brahmarākṣasa
said he would enter first and eat the brahmin. The
quarrel developed into a noisy one and hearing the
sound outside the brahmin came out. The fox accused
the Brahmarākṣasa of having come to eat the brahmin
while the Brahmarākṣasa accused the fox of having
come to eat the goat. The brahmin was glad that he
escaped from a danger and pardoning them sent them
both with presents. This is the benefit of a split
among the enemies.
<div n="NI"/>The king of the owls gave refuge to Cirañjīvī and the
latter expressing gratitude for the favour done took a
vow that he would wreak vengeance on the crows after
getting himself born as an owl in his next birth. At
once the king said “Oh Cirañjīvī, it is not wise to
change one's clan. Once a kite picked up a girl rat and
flew up. On the way the young rat slipped from the
beak of the kite and fell down into the open palm of a
sage doing his sandhyāvandana. The sage by his yogic
powers made it into a beautiful girl and presented her
to his wife. The girl attained womanhood and the sage
was anxious to get her married to a suitable person.
He first approached the Sun and the Sun replied “You
are in search of a powerful husband. Megha (cloud) is
more powerful than myself since at any time it can cast
a shadow over my brilliance. So go and ask Megha
about this.” The sage went to Megha and Megha said
that wind which could carry him away at his will was
more powerful than himself and so directed him to the
wind. The sage approached the wind and it said that
the mountain which could obstruct its path was more
powerful and so the sage went to the mountain. The
mountain said that the rat which could make holes in him
was more powerful and so finally the sage went to the
rat. The rat agreed to marry her but asked how it could
keep her in the hole which was his abode. The sage said
that it was easy and changed her into a rat. This is
how a girl rat became a girl rat again. So do not change
your clan, be a crow and live with me.”
<div n="NI"/>Cirañjīvī from that day onwards started living with the
owls. During day time when the owls slept, the old crow
would fly hither and thither and collect such easily
combustible materials as hay, dry grass and cotton and
stock them beneath the tree covered with dry leaves.
Two months went by like this and one day when the
owls were sleeping Cirañjīvī set fire to the stock of dry
materials beneath the tree. The owls were all burnt to
death. Meghavarṇa and his friends congratulated Cir-
añjīvī on his success. Cirañjīvī said: To obtain difficult
positions great men pass through difficult situations. If
one is prepared to suffer hardships any object can be
achieved. Once a cobra began to starve for want of food.
It went to the land of frogs and told the king of frogs
thus: “Friend, I am in difficulties. I happened to bite
a brahmin boy and that boy died. The boy's father cursed
me. I asked for forgiveness and then he said:—“You
must carry your enemies, the frogs, on your back from
one pond to another pond and live on the food they
give you.” The king of the frogs believed him and
allowed his subjects to be carried away to another pond
from the one in which they were then staying. The
cobra ate all the frogs on the way and at last the king
also was eaten. Thus to destroy the enemies one will
have to carry them on one's backs sometimes. The crows
were happy their enemies the owls were destroyed and
[Page560-b+ 65]
they lived more happily and peacefully than before.
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Labdhanāśa.. (Losing what you got).%} Once a monkey
named Balīmukha separated himself from his group and
came to a fig tree on the banks of a river. When he
jumped from branch to branch on the tree a great many
ripe figs fell into the river. Seeing this a crocodile
named Śiṃśumāra came to the foot of the tree and
started eating the fruits. This went on for a few days
and then the crocodile and the monkey became good
friends. One day the crocodile sat chatting with the
monkey and eating fruits and did not go home. The
wife of the crocodile got worried on not seeing her
husband back at home and sent a maid of hers to
go and enquire what happened to her husband. The
maid came and reported that the crocodile was spending
his time with a she-monkey. The wife of the crocodile
was very sad and angry to hear this and she sent word
through her maid that she was seriously ill and if he
wanted to see her alive he must return to her immed-
iately. The crocodile returned home immediately and
he called a doctor to examine her. The doctor who had
been previously bribed by the crocodile's wife said that
she should be given the heart of a monkey if she were
to be saved from her present ailment. The crocodile was
in a fix. He weighed in his mind the lives of his wife
and friend and then decided to take the life of his friend
to save the life of his wife. The crocodile went to its
place near the fig tree as usual and the monkey made
enquiries about his family. Then Śiṃśumāra said that his
wife wanted to see the monkey-friend and had asked him
to take him home that day. The monkey believed the
story and started for the house of Śiṃśumāra on its
back. When they reached half way in the river Śiṃśu-
māra told Balīmukha thus: “My wife is seriously ill.
The doctor has prescribed the heart of a monkey as the
only medicine for it.” The monkey went pale-white with
fright but instantly he hit upon a plan. Balīmukha said
“Śiṃśumāra, what a fool you are. Why did you not
tell me this at least at the time of our departure? I kept
my heart on the tree before starting, for I never knew
you were in need of it. Let us go back and take it.”
The poor crocodile believed the story and went back
with the monkey to the fig tree. As soon as they reach-
ed the shore the monkey jumped from the back
of the crocodile and ran to the tree. The crocodile
asked the monkey to bring his heart soon but the
monkey laughed from the top of the fig tree and said
thus:—“Dull-witted crocodile, I am not an ass like
you. Have you not heard the story of the foolish ass?”
The monkey then narrated the story of the ass thus:—
“Once a lion calling his minister, the fox, to his side said
that he wanted to eat the flesh of an ass as a remedy
for the stomach trouble he was having by drinking too
much of elephant's blood. The minister started in search
of an ass and found one in the house of a washerman.
The fox said that he was surprised that the ass was do-
ing such heavy work daily with a washerman when a
happy life in the palace of the lion was easily available.
The ass was tempted and it went to the den of the lion.
When it reached there it got frightened and taking the
opportunity of the absence of the lion for his evening
worship left the place in a hurry. The lion sent the fox
again to fetch the ass. The fox came and laughed at
the timidity of the ass. He said that the lion was of a
loving nature and last time when it approached the ass
[Page561-a+ 64]
to embrace him out of affection he ran away like a fool.
The lion knew that the asses were as a class good music-
ians and the lion himself a great lover of music was
anxious to hear the ass sing. The poor ass believed the
story and went to the lion along with the fox When
the ass reached the lion's den the lion was waiting for
him and the ass in all simplicity bowed before the lion.
The lion with one stroke killed the poor beast and leav-
ing the carcass to the care of the fox went for his
Sandhyāvandana. When the lion returned the fox had
already eaten the heart of the ass. The King of the
beasts not finding the heart in its place questioned
the fox and the fox replied that the asses do not possess
either a heart or neck:
<div n="NI"/>When the monkey concluded his story by adding that
never again would he be trapped like this, Śiṃśumāra,
the crocodile, went its way. Labdhanāśa is the act of
losing what came into your possession once.
<div n="NI"/>5) {%Asamprekṣyakārita.%} This is a tale which explains
the danger behind doing things adventurously without
properly studying the pros and cons of an issue.
<div n="NI"/>Once upon a time there lived in Gauḍadeśa a brahmin
named Devaśarmā. His wife Yajñasenā became
pregnant. The father started saying that the son to be
born would be a very fortunate boy. One day the
wife of the brahmin told him thus:—“It is not good to
build castles in the air. Once a brahmacārī walked
home carrying the fried grain he got as his dakṣiṇā in
a pot on his head. He started thinking thus—“I will
sell this fried grain and with the money will buy a
lamb. The lamb will grow and give birth to two kids.
I will then sell the goat and the kids and buy a cow.
The cow will give birth to calves in a short time. I
will buy some land to raise paddy. After selling the
paddy I will renovate my old house and then I will
marry. She will deliver a beautiful son. I will name
the child Somaśarmā. At times leaving the child
alone my wife will go to milk the cow and then I will
hit her like this.” So saying the brahmacārī hit with his
stick the mud pot on his head containing the fried
grain. The pot broke and the whole thing inside fell on
the road.
<div n="NI"/>Devaśarmā on hearing the story of Yajñasenā became
pensive. After five or six days Yajñasenā delivered a
son. Days went by and one morning Yajñasenā went
for her bath in the river nearby entrusting the child to
the care of her husband. Some moments later a
messenger came from the palace asking him to go over
there. The brahmin was in a fix. There was nobody
around to whose care he could leave the child. He
had a mongoose. The brahmin asked the mongoose to
look after the child and went to the palace. Some
time later a big cobra came creeping towards the
child. The mongoose jumped at it and killed it.
The mongoose was smeared with blood after that. The
brahmin returned hurriedly from the palace only to
see the blood-smeared mongoose waiting at the door-
step. Thinking that the mongoose must have killed
his son the brahmin thrashed the poor mongoose to
death. But on entering the room the brahmin found
out his mistake, for there near the child was the dead
body of a deadly cobra. The brahmin regretted his
foolish act of doing a deed before knowing things well,
when Yajñasenā came back after her bath and was
[Page561-b+ 64]
greatly disturbed by the foolish deed of her husband.
She said:—“Once there was in a place a very poor
brahmin boy. He was an orphan with nobody to help
him and he suffered from hunger daily. One night
the boy had a dream. He was told that at midday
next day three beggars would come to his place and
if he slew them they would turn themselves into trea-
sure jars and that the boy could become rich by
using the wealth so received. Next day the brahmin
boy was having his head shaved when as predicted in
the dream three beggars entered his house. The
brahmin boy ran away from the barber and taking a
stick thrashed the three to death. All the three turned
into treasure jars. The barber was astonished. The
brahmin boy gave the barber a sovereign taken from
the jar as his wages. The barber thought that beggars
would turn themselves into treasure jars if they were
thrashed to death. So he waited daily in his house
for beggars to enter his house. One day after a long
waiting three beggars entered his house and the barber
with a hard stick which he had kept ready started
thrashing the beggars. The beggars shrieked and
shouted and ran away abusing the barber. Servants of
the King came on hearing this and took the barber
away and by the command of the King killed him
nailing him on to a spike. Yajñasenā concluded by
saying that even death would be the result if one does
anything without properly understanding things.
<LEND>
