<L>4992<pc>562-a<k1>पाण्डव<k2>पाण्डव
PĀṆḌAVAS¦.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Origin.%} Śantanu, a celebrated King of Candravaṃśa
(lunar dynasty) had two wives, Gaṅgā and Satyavatī.
Bhīṣma was the son of Gaṅgā. After the birth of Bhīṣma
Gaṅgā his mother went to heaven. After that Śantanu
married Satyavatī, mother of Vyāsa. Satyavatī got two
sons, Citrāṅgada and Vicitravīrya. Even while a
bachelor, Citrāṅgada was killed by a Gandharva of
the same name. So Vicitravīrya became King on
Śantanu's death. Bhīṣma forcibly brought the three
daughters of the King of Kāśī named Ambā, Ambikā
and Ambālikā for Vicitravīrya to marry. But knowing
that Ambā was in love with the King of Sālva, Bhīṣma
let her off on the way. Ambikā and Ambālikā became
the wives of Vicitravīrya. But for a long time they had
no sons.
<div n="NI"/>At that time Satyavatī, mother of Vicitravīrya, sent
for Vyāsa her eldest son and asked him to beget sons
of Ambikā and Ambālikā. Ambikā got Dhṛtarāṣṭra of
Vyāsa and Ambālikā, Pāṇḍu, father of the Pāṇḍavas.
Dhṛtarāṣṭra was born blind and he married Gāndhārī.
Pāṇḍu was born pale-white in colour and he married
Kuntī mother of the Pāṇḍavas.
<div n="NI"/>Kuntī was the sister of Vasudeva, father of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
The real name of Kuntī was Pṛthā. Śūrasena, King of
the Yādavas, was the father of Kuntī and Vasudeva.
Because Kuntibhoja son of Sūrasena's sister, had no
issues Kuntī was sent to the palace of Kuntibhoja and
she grew up there. Pṛthā got the name of Kuntī be-
cause of that. Besides Kuntī, Pāṇḍu had another wife
named Mādrī.
[Page562-b+ 64]
<div n="NI"/>While she was living in the palace of Kuntibhoja the
sage Durvāsas came and stayed in the palace as the
king's guest. Kuntī was a little girl then and yet she
served the sage with such care, patience and devo-
tion that the sage was greatly pleased with her and gave
her a divine mantra. He said: “If you call upon any
god repeating this mantra he will manifest himself to
you and bless you with a son equal to him in glory and
valour. You can use this only five times.” The impa-
tient curiosity of youth made Kuntī give a test to the
power of the mantra and though unmarried she invoked
the Sun. The Sun immediately presented himself be-
fore her and by his grace she conceived and got a son
whom she secretly set afloat in a river. A childless
charioteer named Adhiratha happened to see the child
and he took it home and brought it up. When he grew
up he was sent to Hastināpura and the sons of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra took him in their service. He was Karṇa, the
celebrated warrior of the Kauravas. Kuntī married
Pāṇḍu after the birth of Karṇa.
<div n="NI"/>Dhṛtarāṣṭra got of Gāndhārī a hundred sons and a
daughter named Duśśalā. The children of Dhṛtarāṣṭra
were known as Kauravas or Dhārtarāṣṭras. Pāṇḍu had
a curse that he would die the moment he entered
into sexual sport with his wives. (See under Kindama).
So under instructions from her husband Kuntī invoked
Dharma, Vāyu and Indra and got the sons Yudhiṣṭhira,
Bhīmasena and Arjuna. She gave the remaining one
chance to Mādrī and Mādrī invoked the two Aśvinī-
devas, Nāsatya and Dasra and got two sons named
Nakula and Sahadeva. All these five were accepted as
the sons of Pāṇḍu and so they got the name of
Pāṇḍavas. (Upto Chapter 123, Ādi Parva).
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Life in Hastināpura and the lac-palace incident.%} After the
birth of the Pāṇḍavas, Pāṇḍu with his wife and child-
ren spent a very long time in the forest of Śataśṛṅga.
Kaśyapa, the royal priest of Vasudeva, performed the
Upanayana (investiture with the sacred thread) and
such other religious ceremonies ordained for boyhood.
They were educated under the sage Śuka. One day in
the Spring season Pāṇḍu's resolution broke down
under the exhilarating influence of the season and he
caught hold of Mādrī and embraced her despite ear-
nest and repeated protests from Mādrī. At once
the curse of the sage took effect and Pāṇḍu fell
dead. It was the custom then that the wife should end
her life in the funeral pyre of her husband and so
Kuntī and Mādrī came forward to do so. But Mādrī
said that one of them should live to take care of the
children and so entrusting her children also to the care
of Kuntī, Mādrī jumped into the funeral pyre and
ended her life. The sages of the Śataśṛṅga forest took
the children and Kuntī to Hastināpura and handing
them over to the charge of Dhṛtarāṣṭra came back.
<div n="NI"/>The Pāṇḍavas grew up in Hastināpura along with the
Kauravas. But there was no real affection or intimacy
between them. The naturally strong Bhīma found it a
sport to tease and torment the Kauravas whenever he
got an opportunity. Gradually as the teasings of Bhīma
became unbearable a wicked thought of somehow put-
ting an end to Bhīma's life found place in the minds
of the Kauravas. They once poisoned Bhīma and bind-
ing him tight with ropes threw him into the ocean. But
Bhīma went to the world of the Nāgas and came back
[Page563-a+ 65]
unscathed with added siddhis (acquired power). This
annoyed the Kauravas.
<div n="NI"/>It was at this time that Droṇa a renowned preceptor
in archery, came to Hastināpura. Bhīṣma enrolled the
Pāṇḍavas and the Kauravas as disciples of Droṇa. Arjuna
became an extraordinarily brilliant bow-man. This came
off as another reason for the Kauravas to drift away
from the Pāṇḍavas. After the end of their course of
education a contest was held in which Arjuna ranked
first. The time came for Gurudakṣiṇ (fees paid in
bulk at the end of the studies to a preceptor). Droṇa
asked his disciples to bring king Drupada bound hand
and foot before him. The Kauravas failed in that
mission and the Pāṇḍavas under the leadership of
Arjuna fulfilled the demand of their Guru.
<div n="NI"/>When the training and Gurudakṣiṇā were over, Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra crowned Yudhiṣṭhira as the heir-apparent and
this increased the power and status of the Pāṇḍavas
in Hastināpura. The jealousy of Duryodhana knew no
bounds when he found the Pāṇḍavas in the pinnacle of
power and popularity. He decided to kill them. He
therefore, built a new palace in a place called Vāraṇā-
vata and with the permission of Dhṛtarāṣṭra made
them change their residence to the new building.
The new building was cunningly built of lac and
other combustible material. The wise and intelligent
Vidura knew this deceit beforehand and so he had
warned the Pāṇḍavas of the danger through a messen-
ger named Khanaka. The Pāṇḍavas had, therefore,
made ready a secret passage by underground to es-
cape from the building when an emergency arose. The
passage was to lead them from the palace to the forest
nearby. One night Purocana, a minister of Duryodhana,
came stealthily and set fire to the palace. The Pāṇḍavas
with their mother Kuntī escaped from the palace to the
forest nearby. That night a huntress and her five sons
were sleeping in a part of the building and they were
burnt to death. They were all sleeping fully drunk and
so could not escape from the building. Purocana also
was burnt to death. Thus the Pāṇḍavas had to go
away from Hastināpura for a brief period.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%The Exile and its end.%} The Kauravas thought that
Pāṇḍavas died in the fire and in that belief conducted
the funeral rites of their brothers. The Pāṇḍavas after
their escape from the fire walked a long distance
through the forests and came to the banks of the river
Gaṅgā. On their way a demon named Hiḍimba attack-
ed them and Bhīma killed him but at the request of
Dharmaputra married his sister Hiḍimbī. After that
while they were continuing their journey crossing the
river a Gandharva of name Citraratha attacked them.
Citraratha was defeated in a battle and he later became
friendly with the Pāṇḍavas. He gave them many valuable
presents and also narrated to them the story of Tapatī-
saṃvaraṇa. Then they went and stayed in the house of
a brahmin in the village of Ekacakrā. It was at that
time that the Svayaṃvara of Pāñcālī was held. The
Pāṇḍavas went for the Svayaṃvara and married
Pāñcālī. The news then spread that Pāṇḍavas were not
dead but still alive. Dhṛtarāṣṭra then sent for them and
the Pāṇḍavas returned to their palace in Hastināpura.
Yudhiṣṭhira was crowned as King of half of the country
and he built his palace in a place known as Khāṇḍava-
prastha. The palace was designed and built by a demon
named Maya with beautiful Crystals and costly diamonds.
[Page563-b+ 65]
When the Pāṇḍavas were living there Nārada
went to them once. He suggested that Pāñcālī should
remain as wife to the Pāṇḍavas in turn, one year each
to one of them. They accepted the suggestion and
started living like that. Yudhiṣṭhira married Devikā,
daughter of King Śibi, also. (Śloka 70, Chapter 95, Ādi
Parva). Bhīmasena and Arjuna with the help of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa slew Jarāsandha. After that they conducted a
victory march over the country and established their
overlordship by conducting successfully a Rājasūya yajña.
Duryodhana and his brothers once visited Indraprastha,
the palace of the Pāṇḍavas. They were fooled at the
palace and this enraged them. Duryodhana invited
Dharmaputra for a game of dice and the latter lost
everything. Yet Dhṛtarāṣṭra gave them back everything
and sent them to Indraprastha again. Before Dharma-
putra reached the palace Duryodhana once again
challenged him for a game of dice. Despite protests
from all sides Dharmaputra went and played and lost
again everything. To fulfil the conditions of the game
Yudhiṣṭhira went to the forests with his brothers and
wife to spend twelve years in exile and a year incog-
nito. At that time Kuntī lived with Vidura.
<div n="NI"/>It was during this period of exile that the Pāṇḍavas
got the Akṣayapātra (never-empty pot) from the Sun.
They dwelt first in Dvaitavana and then in Kāmya-
kavana. Then they went to the mountain of Gandha-
mādana and from there to Badarikāśrama. From
there they came back again to Kāmyakavana and
while they were living there Duryodhana and his men
went to that forest to see the sufferings of the Pāṇḍavas
and gloat on their sad plight. But Citrasena, a Gan-
dharva, captured Duryodhana and Arjuna got him
released. Duryodhana sent Durvāsas to tease Dharma-
putra but the sage was sent back after being received
duly and well-attended to earn his blessings. During
their stay in that forest Jayadratha kidnapped Pāñcālī
but the Pāṇḍavas rescued her immediately. They went
from there again to Dvaitavana. Dharmadeva tested
them once while they were there. The twelve years of
exile came to an end and as per directions from Dharma-
deva they spent their incognito period of one year in
the court of the King of Virāṭa. After the end of their
incognito life the King of Virāṭa gave in marriage his
daughter Uttarā to Abhimanyu son of Arjuna.
<div n="NI"/>Even after the return of the Pāṇḍavas from the
forests after successfully fulfilling the conditions of the
game, Duryodhana showed obstinate reluctance to part
with even five pin-points of land in favour of the
Pāṇḍavas. A peace mission of Śrī Kṛṣṇa from the
Pāṇḍavas to avoid a war and settle matters amicably to
Dhṛtarāṣṭra failed and the stage was set for a great
battle between the Pāṇḍavas and the Kauravas.
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Ascension to Heaven.%} A great and grim battle was
fought at Kurukṣetra between the Pāṇḍavas and the
Kauravas lasting for eighteen days. Śrī Kṛṣṇa neither
fought nor took arms even once against the Kauravas
but acted as the charioteer of Arjuna. When the war
came to an end the Kauravas were completely annihil-
ated.
<div n="NI"/>Yudhiṣṭhira became King. He performed an Aśva-
medha Yāga. After a few years of reign the Pāṇḍavas
crowned Parīkṣit, son of Abhimanyu, as the King and
started for their Mahāprasthāna (departing this life).
They walked in a line in the order of their age,
[Page564-a+ 64]
Dharmaputra leading and Pāñcālī following last. At
first Pāñcālī fell dead, but nobody turned back. Then
Sahadeva fell and nobody worried. This continued
thus till Dharmaputra was left alone. A dog which
followed them from their very start also remained
alive with Dharmaputra. The dog was none other than
Dharmadeva, father of Dharmaputra. When Dharma-
putra reached the top of the Himālayas Indra was there
ready with the divine car to take him to heaven. But Dhar-
maputra said that he would not come to heaven leaving
his brothers and wife elsewhere. Then Indra informed
him that they were already in heaven and so Dharma-
putra went to heaven with Indra. (Only a general and
succinct history of the Pāṇḍavas is given under this
head. For details see under the heads of each of the
Pāṇḍavas as well as Pāñcālī, Kuntī, Bhīṣma and
Vyāsa).
<LEND>
