<L>5051<pc>574-a<k1>परीक्षित्<k2>परीक्षित्<h>II
PARĪKṢIT II¦. There is a story about another Parīkṣit
belonging to the Ikṣvāku dynasty of kings in chapter 192
of Vana Parva:
<div n="NI"/>Once this Parīkṣit went after a deer while hunting in a
forest and he traversed a long distance following it. On
the way he felt tired by hunger and thirst. He saw a
green grove and a river running still by its side, then.
The king entered the waters of the river with his horse
and after quenching the thirst of the horse and drinking
some water to quench his own thirst, he bound the
horse to a nearby tree and lay on the shores to take rest.
Then he heard from somewhere a melodious song.
The king raised his head and enjoying the music,
waited to see the origin of it. Then a beautiful damsel
appeared before him and the king talked with her and
their conversation ended in the king requesting her to
be his wife. The beautiful maiden consented on one
condition that she should not be made to touch water.
The king agreed and by that time the king's followers
came and the king took her to his palace in a decorated
palanquin followed by his retinue. The king took her
to a secret chamber and stayed with her allowing no-
body to enter the room. The chief minister came to
the palace and enquired what was happening there and
the maidens attending on the queen said that it was
strange that no water was allowed inside the room.
Then the minister arranged a garden with beautiful
flowers and fruits with no water anywhere and a pond
in the middle in which water was not visible from
outside. He then went to the king and told him of his
arrangement and the king took his wife into the garden
and started having amorous sport with her there.
After some time they reached the pond; water was not
visible and so they entered the pond. The moment
they entered the pond they touched water and the
queen disappeared in the water. The King asked the
water of the pond to be emptied and then he saw a
frog sitting at the bottom. The king accused the frog
of having eaten the maiden and he started killing all
the frogs of his state. The frogs became frightened and
they went to their king and complained. The frog-
king in the garb of a maharṣi went and requested the
king to stop this massacre of frogs but the king refused
to yield saying that a frog had eaten his wife. Hearing
that, the sage was shocked and revealing his identity
said “Oh King, be pleased with me; I am Āyus, the
king of the frogs. Your wife was my daughter. She is
called Suśobhanā and she is an obstinate bad-natured
girl. Even from times of old she has cheated many kings
like this.”
<div n="NI"/>Hearing this the king pleaded to the frog-king to give
him back Suśobhanā. He gave Suśobhanā to Parīkṣit.
[Page574-b+ 65]
But he cursed his daughter that she would bear
misbehaving children because of her cheating many
kings before. Āyus disappeared then. Parīkṣit begot
of Suśobhanā three princes named Śala, Bala and Dala.
When Śala grew up Parīkṣit crowned him as king and
left for the forests for doing penance. (Chapter 192, Vana-
Parva).
<LEND>
