<L>5083<pc>576-a<k1>पार्वती<k2>पार्वती
PĀRVATĪ¦. Wife of Śiva.
<div n="NI"/>Pārvatī is known under different names and worshipped
in different forms. Amarakośa (Sanskrit lexicon) gives
the following synonyms for Pārvatī:
<div n="NI"/>Umā, Kātyāyanī, Gaurī, Kālī, Haimavatī, Īśvarī,
Śivā, Bhavānī, Rudrāṇī, Śarvāṇī, Sarvamaṅgalā,
Aparṇā, Durgā, Mṛḍānī, Caṇḍikā, Ambikā, Āryā,
Dākṣāyaṇī, Girijā, Menakātmajā, Cāmuṇḍā, Karṇa-
moṭī, Carccikā, Bhairavī.
<div n="NI"/>Some of these names refer to the various dispositions of
Pārvatī, while a few are the names in the various incar-
nations of Pārvatī. The origin of Pārvatī and her
other prominent births are given below:—
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Incarnation of Satī.%} Śiva was born from Brahmā. To
make Śiva active, Satī, an aspect of Mahāmāyā, was
born as the daughter of Dakṣa, one of the Prajāpatis.
The 9th Skandha of Devī Bhāgavata gives the following
story about the incarnation of Satī:
<div n="NI"/>While Brahmā was engaged in creation a few daityas
named Hālāhalas were born. They were very valiant
and ferocious and they did penance to propitiate
Brahmā and after obtaining boons from him conquered
the three worlds and asserted their supremacy in all the
three worlds. They defied the Trimūrtis (trio of Brahmā.
Viṣṇu and Śiva). Śiva and Viṣṇu in despair went to
war against them. The war continued for sixty thousand
years and both the daityas and Devas were exhausted.
Viṣṇu and Śiva refused to attend to their duties. Brahmā
understood the situation and taking into his hands the
work of Śiva and Viṣṇu also and calling his sons,
Sanaka and others to his side said “Oh sons, Śiva and
Viṣṇu are incapable of doing their work now, I have
therefore, taken on myself the charge of their duties also
and hence I do not find time to do penance. You must
therefore, do penance to propitiate Mahāmāyā. Let
her be pleased and when she incarnates in this universe
the world will be happy.”
<div n="NI"/>As soon as they heard this the Prajāpatis headed by
Dakṣa went to the forests on the side of the Himālayas.
They started doing penance reciting the mantra of
Māyābīja. The penance lasted for a hundred thousand
years and then the goddess was pleased. She graciously
appeared before them with three eyes and four hands
[Page576-b+ 64]
bearing pāśa, aṅkuśa, vara and abhīti. Dakṣa and others
praised her and she granted them boons. She did also
promise to be born as the daughter of Dakṣa. Dakṣa and
others returned happy.
<div n="NI"/>Mahāmāyā incarnated as Satī in the house of Dakṣa.
Satī blossomed into a beautiful maiden and all the
Prajāpatis joined together and made Śiva marry her.
The bride and bridegroom lived in the bride's house.
<div n="NI"/>At that time the sage Durvāsas worshipped Jagadambikā
seated at Jāmbūnada meditating on her and reciting the
māyābīja mantra. The devī was immensely pleased and
appearing before him gave him the divine garland lying
round her neck. The garland was highly perfumed.
Honey flowed from it always. Wearing that garland the
sage travelled through air and reached the palace of
Dakṣa, father of Satī, and gave that garland to him.
Dakṣa received it with great delight and took it to his
bed-room and placed it there. That night Dakṣa inhal-
ed the perfume of the divine garland and enjoyed an
amorous sport with his wife. This act made the garland
impure and the latent curse in it made Dakṣa hate his
daughter Satī and her husband Śiva. After that Dakṣa
conducted a Yāga and insulted Śiva by not inviting
either him or his wife. Satī, however, attended the Yāga
uninvited and she was insulted. Unable to bear the in-
sult Satī leapt into the fire and committed suicide. From
that day onwards Śiva roamed about in the world
crying “Satī, Satī.”
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Satī, Pārvatī (Kālī).%} During that time a son named
Vajrāṅga was born to Kaśyapa of his wife Diti. This
virtuous asura practised austerities for a thousand
years and when he opened his eyes after his long penance
he did not see his wife. Vajrāṅga started in search
of her collecting fruits and roots for his food on
the way. Then he came across her standing underneath
a tree weeping and she said: “All the time you were
doing penance, Indra was teasing me. I was living
without food on the banks of the river keeping a vow of
silence. Indra came there in the form of a monkey and
threw away all my articles used for worship. Then he
came in the form of a lion and frightened me. Then
again he came in the form of a serpent and bit me. Oh
lord, am I, your wife, an orphan?” Vajrāṅga got angry
and decided to do penance again to find a remedy for
this unjust act of Indra. Then Brahmā coming to know
of the fierce decision of Vajrāṅga appeared before him
and said “Why do you go in for a penance again? Ask
me what you want and I shall grant you.” Vajrāṅga
said “Oh Lord, I did penance all these thousand years
to get rid of the demoniac disposition of mine. But
when I was engaged in meditation Indra tormented my
virtuous wife very much without any reason. If you will
bless me I must get a son named Tāraka to kill all the
devas including Indra.” Brahmā granted the boon.
<div n="NI"/>Varāṅgī became pregnant and after twelve months was
born a son to her named Tārakāsura. Tāraka did severe
penance sitting in the midst of Pañcāgni (five fires) for
a long time and Brahmā was pleased and appeared
before him. Tāraka then said: “If I were to die I must
die at the hands of a seven-day-old babe. You must
grant me a boon like that.” Brahmā granted the boon.
Tāraka became arrogant with that boon and joined
hands with such fierce demons as Prasena, Jambha and
Kālanemi to create havoc in the three worlds of Svarga,
[Page577-a+ 65]
Bhūmi and Pātāla. They blessed the wicked and killed
the virtuous. It was the time when Śiva was sadly roam-
ing about in search of his lost wife Satī.
<div n="NI"/>All the devas headed by Indra went and complained to
Brahmā. Brahmā said:—“After all, this calamity is not
without remedy. There is an escape from the boon I
have given him. Tārakāsura himself has allowed him
to be killed by a sevenday-old babe. If there should be
such a babe it should be from the virility of Śiva.
Tārakāsura thinks that since Śiva is observing brahma-
carya after the death of Satī there is no chance of a babe
being born to him. That was why he was prepared to
allow that clause in that boon. I shall therefore suggest
a plan. Satī herself should be born as the daughter
of Himavān and Menā in the name of Kālī. Kālī should
do great penance and break the vow of celibacy of Śiva.
If Śiva accepts her as his wife and a child is born to
them we are saved.”
<div n="NI"/>Śiva was all this time spending his time thinking of
Satī. Once during this time Śiva bathed in the river
Kālindī and then the waters of the river Kālindī be-
came black and the waters remained black ever since
that.
<div n="NI"/>Indra and others on their return from Brahmā went to
Bṛhaspati to think about further procedure in the
matter. Bṛhaspati said:—“No obstacle would ever come
to any act of the devas. Himavān was doing penance
for a long time to obtain a child and by the grace of Śiva,
Satī has already been born as the daughter of Himavān.
(Skanda Purāṇa in its Sambhava Kāṇḍa states thus
about the birth of Satī as Pārvatī. “Satī before
jumping into the fire meditated on Śiva and prayed
that she should be born in her next birth as his wife.
Śiva granted that request. It was at that time that Hima-
vān along with his wife Menā went to the vicinity of
Amṛtasaras and started doing penance to get a child.
One day when Himavān and his wife were bathing in
the saras they saw a gem of a girl in the waters and
they took it. Then they found the child with four hands
and all other emblems of goddess on her. They praised
her with verses from Vedas and soon the divine emblems
faded away and Himavān gave the child to his wife.”)
Brahmā never wanted Tāraka to know that the child
was an incarnation of Devī and so he made the
babe black by sending Niśā to do so. Niśā entered the
womb of the pregnant Menā while she was sleeping with
her mouth open one day. The child was like a sapphire idol.
Himavān was surprised to see the child. The child will
do severe penance and obtain Śiva as her husband. Śiva
and Satī will never be separated in any of their births.
Oh Indra now go and try to get Śiva interested in a
married life.”
<div n="NI"/>Himavān and Menā had three daughters and a son.
The devas were watching who among the three—Rāgiṇī,
Kuṭilā and Kālī—would become the consort of Śiva.
All the three were interested in penance. The devas
took Rāgiṇī to Brahmaloka and showed her to Brahmā
and the latter declared that Rāgiṇī was incapable of
bearing the virility of Śiva. Rāgiṇī got angry and
Brahmā cursed her and made her into Sandhyārāga
and she took her place in the sky. Then the devas took
Kuṭilā to Brahmā and the latter said that she was
also incapable of being a mate of Śiva. Kuṭilā also
got angry and Brahmā made her into a river and kept
her in Brahmaloka. Menā was greatly distressed at
[Page577-b+ 65]
the loss of her two daughters and so she advised Kālī,
her third daughter to go home, discontinuing the
penance. She at first said Umā (Mā = do not) and so
she got the name of Umā She was the daughter of a
Parvata (Himavān is a parvata (mountaiṇ) and so she
got the name Pārvatī (mountain-girl) also. Kālī later
went home. But after some time the natural inclination
in her led her to start a severe penance again.
<div n="NI"/>The young Kālī, who was only a small girl then, accom-
panied by two of her girl companions went to the shores
of a river deep in the forests and started practising
austerities. In summer she would sit in the midst of
Pañcāgni (five fires) and in the rainy season she would
sit in water and do penance. The penance lasted for a
thousand years.
<div n="NI"/>Śiva who was roaming about in search of Satī went once
to the palace of Himavān. Śiva agreed to stay there for
some time at the persistent request of Himavān. During
his stay there Śiva understood that one of the daughters
of his host was doing penance meditating on Śaṅkara.
Curious to know more about her, Śiva one day went
to the āśrama of Kālī. Kālī saw Śiva and she stood up
bowing before him. Śiva was pleased with her. But
before Kālī could have another look at Śiva, he vanished
from there.
<div n="NI"/>Kālī was disappointed and continued her penance again.
Years went by and one day there came to her āśrama
a Vaṭu (a brahmin brahmacārī). Kālī and her companions
stood up and worshipped the Vaṭu who looked brilliant
with ashes on his body and wearing rudrākṣa and
akṣamālā (berry of a tree and rosary made of it) and
carrying in his hand a daṇḍa (stick) and a Kamaṇḍalu
(water pot). After formal introduction the Vaṭu asked
Kālī the purpose of her penance and Kālī told him all
about it. Then the Vaṭu asked her in tones of surprise
why such a beautiful girl like herself born to be the wife
of a king, should go after a crudely dressed aged man
like Śiva who goes on the back of a bullock always.
Pārvatī resented the statement of the Vaṭu and got
angry with him. Then Śiva appeared before her in his
real form and married Pārvatī (Kālī alias Umā) in the
presence of devas and maharṣis.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Pārvatī changes into Gaurī.%} Śiva and Pārvatī spent
their honeymoon travelling throughout the world. Years
went by like that. One day Śiva in a spirit of sport
called Pārvatī ‘Kālī, Kālī’. Kālī meant black one and
Pārvatī was as black as sapphire. Pārvatī misunderstood
Śiva addressing her thus two times and thought, perhaps,
Śiva did not like her black body and trembling with
grief said “If a wound is made by an arrow it will heal
in due course; if the top of a tree is chopped off it will
again blossom when the season comes; but the wound in
the minds of others by harsh words is never healed. It was
not my fault that I was born black and I would never again
come near you with this black body. I am going.” Saying
thus with a firm determination, she rose up into the air and
travelling for some time reached a big forest. She creat-
ed by her reciting the smaraṇamantra four attendants
for her named Somaprabhā, Jayā, Vijayā and Jayantī
and started doing penance there. She practised severe
austerities standing on one foot for a hundred years and
then Brahmā appeared before her and sought the reason
why Pārvatī, wife of Parameśvara should do such severe
penance and then she narrated to him all that had
happened. Brahmā after hearing her story told her thus:—
[Page578-a+ 65]
“Virtuous woman, from today onwards, your black com-
plexion would change into one of the hue of a lotus
petal. Because of that ‘gaura’ hue you would be called
‘Gaurī’.” By the time Brahmā finished blessing her the
colour changed into the one described by Brahmā.
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Gaurī changes into Kātyāyanī, Vindhyavāsinī, Caṇḍikā and%}
{%Cāmuṇḍikā.%} When Devī became Gaurī her superficial
skin peeled off and dropped down, it is said.
<div n="NI"/>At that time there were two great demons called
Rambha and Karambha. They had no sons and they
started severe penance. Karambha was doing penance
standing in deep waters and a crocodile swallowed him.
The crocodile was none other than Indra. Rambha did
penance standing in the midst of fire and finding no
result even after a long time decided to sacrifice himself
into the fire. Agnideva then appeared before him and
blessed him thus: “Oh Rambha, you will get a mighty
son of the woman you love.” Rambha stopped his
penance and returned home with the boon. On the way
he saw a beautiful she-buffalo and passion rose in him
and he made contacts with the buffalo. The buffalo be-
came pregnant and in due course delivered a child
which later on became the notorious Mahiṣāsura. In
the meantime a buffalo loved Mahiṣāsura's mother and
it attacked Rambha and gored him to death. The
Yakṣas burnt his dead body in a funeral pyre and the
she-buffalo jumped into the pyre and abandoned her
life. From that pyre there arose then another demon
and he was the notorious Raktabīja. Mahiṣāsura became
the king of demons and Raktabīja, Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa
became his ministers. They attacked the devas and drove
them to exhaustion. The devas took refuge in Brahmā
to think of a plan to kill those asuras. Viṣṇu, and Śiva
took part in the conference. Viṣṇu the eternal, got
angry along with Śiva and became fierce like the fire
of death. Brahmā and the devas also became angry and
from the face of everyone a brilliance emanated and all
these brilliances joined together and reached the holy
āśrama of Kātyāyana maharṣi and that eminent sage
also sent out a brilliance. The ascetic brilliance joined
with the divine brilliance and the combined brilliance
shone like a thousand suns. Then this superior brilliance
entered the peeled-off skin of Kālī to produce the
fierce and divine form of a goddess named Kātyāyanī.
Each limb of the new form was made up of the brillian-
ce from a particular god as follows: From the brilliance
of Mahendra was formed the face; from Agni, the eyes;
from Yama, the hair; from Viṣṇu, the eighteen hands;
from Indra, the central parts; from Varuṇa, the hip
and the thighs; from Brahmā, the feet; from Sūrya,
the toes; from Prajāpati, the teeth; from Vasus, the
fingers of the hands; from Yakṣa, the nose; from Vāyu
the ears and from the ascetic brilliance, the erotic eyebrows.
Thus Kātyāyanī shone in the world with a figure formed
with distinctive perfection.
<div n="NI"/>All the gods and devas presented Kātyāyanī with gifts:—
Śiva gave her a trident (triśūla); Viṣṇu a Discus;
Varuṇa, a conch; Agni, a javelin; Vāyu, a bow; Sūrya,
a never-empty quiver; Indra, Vajraghaṇṭā; Yama,
a daṇḍa (stick); Vaiśravaṇa, a mace; Brahmā, a rosary
garland; Kāla, a sword and shield; Candra, Cāmara
(white brush-like fan) and a pearl necklace; Ocean
a garland; Himavān, a lion; Viśvakarmā, a moon-
disced Cūḍāmaṇi, earrings and a dagger; the King of
Gandharvas, a silver-plated drinking cup; the King of
[Page578-b+ 65]
nāgas, a nāgahāra; and the Ṛtus (seasons), never-
fading flowers. The three-eyed Kātyāyanī on getting
all these was highly pleased and made a roaring sound.
Devī, thus worshipped and adored by all, mounted on
the lion and went to the topmost peak of the Vindhyas.
Indra and Agni went and served Kātyāyanī thus living
there. Vindhya called Devī, Kauśikī and Agastya
called her Durgā.
<div n="NI"/>Mahiṣāsura once went to the Vindhyas after conquering
all the three worlds. He was accompanied by his
ministers, Raktabīja, Caṇḍa, Muṇḍa, Cikṣura and
Naraka. They met there the goddess Kātyāyanī.
Mahiṣāsura fell in love with the beautiful and well-
figured Kātyāyanī and he sent Dundubhi as messenger
to the goddess to make her know his desire. Dundubhi
approached Kātyāyanī and told her to become the wife
of Mahiṣa, the emperor of all the three worlds. Devī
replied that she would accept as her husband one who
defeated her and that was the custom also in her
caste. Mahiṣāsura with a huge army and heavy equip-
ments went to war with her. But Kātyāyanī entered
the field alone mounted on her lion and the devas
watching her enter the battlefield without wearing
even an armour were shocked. Devī went forward
reciting the mantra of Viṣṇupañcākṣara given to her
by Śiva and lakhs and lakhs of demons were killed by
the adroit sword-swinging and the dinning roar of
Kātyāyanī. Mahiṣa and his ministers surrounded her
and Devī stepping down from the lion started to dance
wielding her sword. Swinging her sword to the rhythm
of her dance-steps Devī picked up the leading demons
one by one and killed them. Seeing that, Mahiṣāsura
approached her, burning with rage like the pralayāgni.
All the attendants of Devī fled. Those who remained
were trampled to death by Mahiṣāsura. Devī at first
killed the ministers and then faced Mahiṣāsura. Mahiṣa
became an elephant and Devī cut off its trunk. The
elephant became a buffalo then. Devī sent a spike and
it broke. Even Devī's Discus, granted to her by Viṣṇu was
blunted when it hit the rock-like body of Mahiṣāsura.
Varuṇapāśa, Yamadaṇḍa and Indravajra were all
alike fruitless against the mighty Mahiṣāsura. Angered
Devī jumped on the buffalo form of the demon and
drove it to exhaustion and when at last its power of
resistance had failed, Devī plunged her spear into the
ears of the buffalo and the demon fell dead.
<div n="NI"/>Many years went by. Kaśyapa begot of his wife Danu
three great sons named Śumbha, Niśumbha and Namuci.
All were fierce demons. Namuci attacked Indra but
they soon came to a compromise. But Indra hid in the
foam of the ocean which entered the ears, nose and
mouth of Namuci while he was playing in the ocean.
Indra used his Vajrāyudha from inside and killed him.
Śumbha and Niśumbha were angry and they entered
svarga and defeating everyone there, carried all the
riches from there to the earth. They met Raktabīja and
he said “Oh Lords, I am Raktabīja, minister of Mahi-
ṣāsura. Kātyāyanī Devī killed virtuous Mahiṣāsura.
His two ministers Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa are hiding inside
the ocean afraid of Kātyāyanī devī.” While he was speak-
ing thus Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa also came there. When
they all exchanged ideas Śumbha called one of his men
and said “Bho: Sugrīvāsura, go and tell Kātyāyanī to
be my wife.” Sugrīva went to Kātyāyanī and returned
disappointed and said “Lords Śumbha and Niśumbha,
[Page579-a+ 65]
I told Devī your message and she only laughed. She
said that Śumbha and Niśumha might be mighty lords
but only those who defeated her could marry her.”
<div n="NI"/>Enraged at this arrogance of Kātyāyanī, Śumbha sent
Dhūmrākṣa to drag Kātyāyanī down to him. Dhūmrākṣa
with six Akṣauhiṇīs of soldiers went to the seat of
Kātyāyanī and challenged her to a fight. Devī stepped
down from her seat and stood before Dhūmrākṣa and
the latter leaped forward to catch hold of her. But
Dhūmrākṣa was burnt to death by the huṃkāra fire
of the goddess. Not only that, the huṃkāra sound
reached the ears of Śumbha. Śumbha felt small by this
prowess of the Devī but his rage increased. Śumbha
then sent Caṇḍa, Muṇḍa and the great demon Ruru
also with an army of a hundred crores of demons to
face Devī Kauśikī. When the enemies reached Vindhya
the bhūtas of Devī made loud and shrill noises. The
lion of Kātyāyanī roared and she leaped into the midst
of the army sword in hand. Lakhs and lakhs of asuras
fell dead by the sword of the goddess. Devī once opened
her mouth and lakhs of asuras entered it and then she
shut her mouth keeping in her stomach the asuras till
they all died. Devī beat the demon Ruru to death.
Devī plucked her matted hair and struck it on the
ground and from there arose the fierce form of Cāmuṇḍī.
Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa fled but Cāmuṇḍī followed them to
Pātāla and catching hold of them chopped off their
heads and presented them to Kātyāyanī. Then Devī,
Cāmuṇḍī and the bhūtas together tore to pieces all the
remaining asuras and stored them all in their stomachs.
Hearing this Śumbha's rage knew no bounds and he
started with an army of thirty crores of men. The army
swept on like an ocean and finding it moving forward
Cāmuṇḍī roared. Kātyāyanī made a sound like a lion's
roar. Brahmāṇī holding high the dagger jumped down to
fight. Māheśvarī with snakes and the spike, with the
three eyes open got down in fits of anger. Kaumārī
with the javelin hanging round her waist and bright
eyes entered the field. Vaiṣṇavī swinging her sword and
whirling the mace with many weapons rushed to the
field. Vārāhī breaking open the earth with its tusk and
bearing a large wooden pestle came to fight. Indrāṇī
with diamond on her sides came to fight. Nārasiṃhī
brushing the manes on her breast, shaking the stars and
whirling the planets and making a fierce appearance
came to the field. (Cāmuṇḍī, Brahmāṇī, Māhesvarī,
Vaiṣṇavī, Vārāhī and Nārasiṃhī are the different forms
of Kātyāyanī. They are called Saptamātṛs (seven
mothers). These saptamātṛs were born when-Kātyāyanī
in her wrath beat the earth with her matted hair).
Cāmuṇḍī roared. The world became dark. Hearing
the roar Śiva descended to the field. The Asuras
surrounded the Devī again. But they all fell dead with
blood flowing in a stream. The dead bodies of the
asuras became heaped up and in despair Śumbha and
Niśumbha wept. Seeing that, Raktabīja got angry and
rushed at Devī. The Saptamātṛs shouted and Cāmuṇḍī
opened her mouth. The lower jaw of Cāmuṇḍī touched
Pātāla when she opened her mouth from the sky.
Raktabīja, wounded and bleeding by a dagger stroke of
Cāmuṇḍī, fell into the mouth of Cāmuṇḍī and dis-
appeared. Then Niśumbha interfered and the fight be-
came one between Niśumbha and Devī. The fat and sturdy
hands of Niśumbha and the mace he was carrying fell
by an arrow sent by Devī. Then Devī struck him with
[Page579-b+ 65]
her spike and Niśumbha was killed. Both Śumbha and
Niśumbha who came to wreak vengeance on her were
thus killed. (See under Laṅkālakṣmī to know how Pārvatī
became Laṅkālakṣmī).
<div n="NI"/>5) {%Pārvatī takes the forms of Elephant and monkey.%} Śiva
and Pārvatī went about enjoying amorous sports in the
forests. Śiva turned himself into a tusker and Pārvatī
became a she-elephant then. Gaṇapati was born as a
result of that sport. Śiva became a monkey and Pārvatī
became his mate and Hanūmān was born as a result
of that sport. (See under Gaṇapati and Hanūmān).
<div n="NI"/>6) {%Pārvatī became Sītā.%} This happened when Rāma and
Lakṣmaṇa along with Sītā were in the forests. One day
Sītā went to the Godāvarī river nearby to bring water
to the āśrama and she stayed for some time watching
two swans playing in the midst of lotuses in the lake
there. Hearing a sound she looked into the river and
saw Śrī Rāma bathing there. She was surprised. When
she left the āśrama Rāma was sitting there. At the
same time another thing happened in the āśrama. Śrī
Rāma found Sītā coming to him and when he arose to
receive her the figure disappeared. Then Śrī Rāma
found bathing by Sītādevī also disappeared. When an
astonished Sītā reached the āśrama she found an equally
astonished Śrī Rāma sitting there. They then told
each other their experiences and Śrī Rāma on medita-
tion understood that in the guise of Rāma and Sītā Śiva
and Pārvatī had come from Kailāsa to know about
the welfare of the princes in exile.
<div n="NI"/>7) {%Pārvatī, Vihuṇḍa and Jalandhara.%} See under those
names.
<div n="NI"/>8) {%Other details.%}
<div n="NI"/>(i) Pārvatī shines in the court of Brahmā. (Śloka 41,
Chapter 11, Sabhā Parva).
<div n="NI"/>(ii) When the Pāṇḍavas were in exile Pārvatī guarded
Arjuna always. (Vana Parva, Chapter 37, Śloka 38).
<div n="NI"/>(iii) Once Pārvatī appeared in person and blessed
Dharmaputra. (Chapter 6, Virāṭa Parva).
<div n="NI"/>(iv) Once Śrī Kṛṣṇa pleased Pārvatī and she granted
Kṛṣṇa boons. The first was that he would have sixteen
thousand wives. The next was a beautiful form for
Kṛṣṇa and the next was love of his relatives. Another
boon was that Kṛṣṇa would have the prosperity to be
able to give food for seven thousand travellers daily.
(Śloka 7, Chapter 15, Anuśāsana Parva).
<div n="NI"/>(v) It was because of a curse of Pārvatī that devas do
not get sons by their own wives. There is the following
story behind that.
<div n="NI"/>Śiva and Pārvatī went to the Himālayas after their
marriage and started living there. Śiva and Pārvatī
were so much engrossed in their amorous sport that they
were oblivious of the happenings outside. After a long
time when their sport continued without a break the
devas went in and informed Śiva that the whole universe
was trembling by their sport and if Śiva produced a
son the world would be incapable of bearing it and so
he should withdraw from the act of producing a child.
Śiva agreed and drew his virile strength upwards.
Pārvatī did not like that and she cursed the devas that
they would never have sons of their own wives. (Cha-
pter 84, Anuśāsana Parva).
<div n="NI"/>(vi) Pārvatī once taught Gaṅgādevī the duties of
women. (Śloka 33, Chapter 146, Anuśāsana Parva).
<div n="NI"/>(vii) Pārvatī resides in the mount of Muñjavān in
Kailāsa with Paramaśiva. There is a mount called
[Page580-a+ 64]
Muñjavān in the Himālayas. Bhagavān Umāpati (Śiva)
shines there on treetops, underneath the trees, on the
mounts and in caves. (Chapter 8, Aśvamedha Parva).
<div n="NI"/>(viii) The Mahābhārata uses the following synonyms
for Pārvatī: Ambikā, Āryā, Umā, Bhīmā, Śailaputrī,
Sailarājasutā, Śākambharī, Śarvāṇī, Deveśī, Devī,
Durgā, Gaurī, Girisutā, Girirājātmajā, Kālī, Mahā-
bhīmā, Mahādevī, Mahākālī, Maheśvarī, Parvatarāja-
kanyā, Rudrāṇī, Rudrapatnī and Tribhuvaneśvarī.
<div n="NI"/>9) {%Pārvatī pratiṣṭhā.%} The installation of the goddess
Pārvatī in temples is done with the following sacred
rites.
<div n="NI"/>An inner temple should be constructed and the idol of
Devī should be installed there. Before that, on the
bed of the platform bearing the idol, amulets with spi-
ritual inscriptions on them should be deposited there
just as in the case of the installation of Maheśvara.
Then Parāśakti should be consecrated there with recit-
als of mantras followed by the deposition of Pañcarat-
nas meditating on Piṇḍikā. Then the idol of Devī
should be fixed on the platform. After that Kriyā-
śakti should be consecrated on the platform and Jñāna-
śakti on the idol. Finally Ambikā named Śivā should
be invoked with the mantras as ordained in the
scriptures.
<div n="NI"/>The different zones like the east and the west and the
guards of the Universe like Indra should also be wor-
shipped. (Chapter 98, Agni Purāṇa; Sarga 36, Bāla
Kāṇda, Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa; Chapters 51 and 53, Vā-
mana Purāṇa; 7th Skandha, Devī Bhāgavata; 4th Skan-
dha, Bhāgavata; Chapter 43, Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa; Ara-
ṇya Kāṇḍa, Uttara Rāmāyaṇa, Kamba Rāmāyaṇa;
Chapter 121, Padma Purāṇa; Chapter 186, Ādi Parva;
Chapter 37, Vana Parva, Chapter 6, Virāṭa Parva;
Chapter 23, Bhīṣma Parva; Chapter 202, Droṇa Parva;
Chapter 283, Śānti Parva; Chapters 15, 84, 140 and
146, Anuśāsana Parva; and Chapter 8, Aśvamedha
Parva).
<div n="NI"/>PĀRVATĪYA I. (PARVATĪYA). A king who lived
during the period of Mahābhārata. He was born of the
species of the dānava called Kukṣi. (Śloka 56, Chapter
67, Ādi Parva).
<LEND>
