<L>5094<pc>582-b<k1>पाटलीपुत्र<k2>पाटलीपुत्र
PĀṬALĪPUTRA¦. An ancient city of Purāṇic fame in
Uttara Bhārata. The former name of this city was
Pāṭalīputraka. There is a story behind the city getting
this name:—
<div n="NI"/>There was once a sacred pond named Kanakhala on
the banks of river Gaṅgā. A brahmin from Dakṣiṇa-
bhārata along with his wife came to this pond and
started practising severe austerities there. He got three
sons while living there. After some time the parents
died. The three sons went to a place named Rājagṛha
and studied there. The three were very poor and they
went from there to perform penance to propitiate
Subrahmaṇya (Kumārasvāmī). On their way they
entered the house of a brahmin named Bhojika living
on the sea-coast. Bhojika had three daughters and the
brahmin after knowing all details about them gave his
daughters in marriage to them along with all his wealth.
The brahmin went to perform penance and the three
brahmin boys with their wives lived in that house.
<div n="NI"/>Once there occurred a famine and the three brahmins
left their home leaving their wives alone. The second
girl was pregnant at that time and she and her sisters
went to the house of a friend of their father named
Yajñadatta. In due course she delivered a son and all
[Page583-a+ 63]
the three women looked after the child as their common
son.
<div n="NI"/>Śiva and Pārvatī were travelling by air once and seeing
this child Śiva said thus:—“I am blessing this boy.
This boy in his previous birth jointly with his wife
worshipped me with great devotion. They are now born
again to enjoy life. His wife in his previous birth was
born as the daughter of King Mahendra. Her name
was Pāṭalī and she would again be the wife of this boy
in this life.”
<div n="NI"/>That night Paramaśiva appeared before the mother of
the boy in a dream and said “You must name this boy
Putraka. Everyday morning when he rises up a lakh of
small gold coins will fall to the ground from his
head.”
<div n="NI"/>They therefore, named the boy Putraka and every
morning they would collect and store the gold coins
falling from his head. When Putraka grew up he was
immensely rich and started giving away his riches to
brahmins as gifts. The news of this spread far and wide
and brahmins from all sides began to flock to his
house.
<div n="NI"/>One day among the brahmins who flocked to his house
were his father and his two brothers. The fathers felt
envious of the extraordinary progress in wealth and
fame of their son and they cleverly took the son to a
lonely place in a temple in the heart of the Vindhya
mountains to kill him. After engaging some murderers
to kill him they left the place. Putraka bribed
the murderers with his costly dresses and ornaments
and escaped from there. There was a great storm then
and Putraka walked through it. On his way he met the
two sons of Mayāsura quarrelling for the three things
left over to them by their father. The paternal property
consisted of a stick, a pair of sandals and a pot all
of which had some strange powers. If you draw on
the ground with the stick you will have at that spot
anything you desire. If you wear the sandals you can
travel in the air. If you dip your hands into the pot
you will get plenty of food.
<div n="NI"/>Putraka immediately hit upon a plan and addressed the
quarrelling brothers thus:—“Why do you fight like
this? It is better you decide it by a competitive race.
He who wins the race should have the right to get the
things.” The two brothers agreed to it and leaving the
things with Putraka started running. When they had
gone a long distance away from the spot, Putraka put
on the sandals and taking the stick and pot with him
rose into the air. He landed at a city far away from
the spot and started living at the house of an old
woman. The King of that country had a daughter named
Pāṭalī. When the old lady described to him the beauty
and good qualities of Pāṭalī, Putraka wanted to marry
her. So at night when everybody in the palace was
asleep Putraka put on his sandals and entered the room
of Pāṭalī through the windows. Pāṭali woke up; she
liked Putraka and they were married according to
Gāndharva rites. Then they both went out of the
palace by air with the help of the sandals and landed
at a place on the shores of the Gaṅgā. Then at the
request of Pāṭalī Putraka made a city there with the
help of the stick and they named it Pāṭalīputraka.
(Kathāpīṭhalambaka, Kathāsaritsāgara).
<LEND>
