<L>5096<pc>583-b<k1>पतञ्जलि<k2>पतञ्जलि
PATAÑJALI¦. A celebrated commentator in Sanskrit.
Patañjali is one of the best commentators of Pāṇini's
Vyākarṇasūtras. Pandits are of opinion that he got his
name Patañjali to mean that people should worship
(añjali) at his foot (pāda). He was such an adorable
person. Pandits believe that Patañjali is the author of
Yogasūtra and Carakasaṃhitā. A few believe that
Patañjali was the incarnation of Ādiśeṣa. But modern
scholars are of opinion that Patañjali, the commentator
and Patañjali the author of Yogasūtras are two different
persons.
<div n="NI"/>In his book on Patañjalicarita, Rāmabhadradīkṣita
writes about the birth of Patañjali:—“Once
Goṇikā, daughter of a sage, prayed to the Sun-god for
a son At once Ananta, King of the serpents, fell on
her palm in the form of a sage. The ascetic girl brought
up that sage as her son. After some years the sage
went to Cidambara and prayed to Śiva to bless him
with enough knowledge and wisdom to write a com-
mentary on Kātyāyana's Vyākaraṇavārttika (explana-
tory rules on Pāṇiṇi's sūtras). Śiva blessed him and the
sage wrote the commentary. Many disciples went to
him to learn the commentary and the sage accepted
them all as disciples and promised to teach them provi-
ded they would abide by a condition, namely, that nobody
should remove a curtain he would place between him
and the disciples while teaching. The teaching went
on for some time. He would reply to their doubts
but the replies were peculiar and ambiguous and the
disciples, getting disappointed, removed the curtain
one day. The sage cursed them all. One of the dis-
ciples was away from the place then and the sage
cursed him for leaving the place without permission
during the course of study. He begged for relief and
the sage was pleased. The Guru said if he could teach
his commentary to one who would say logically that
the Bhūtakarmavācyakṛdanta (past participle of a
verb) of the root ‘Pac’ was ‘Pakva’ he would be
released from the curse. Candragupta who came
from Ujjayinī gave the correct answer and he was
taught the Mahābhāṣya. Bhartṛhari was the son born
to Candragupta of a Śūdra woman.
<div n="NI"/>Patañjali, according to Professor Goldstucker, was a
courtier of King Puṣyamitra and was alive when
Menander attacked Sāketa. This would mean that
Patañjali lived before B.C. 150.
<LEND>
