<L>5106<pc>584-a<k1>पट्टत्तान<k2>पट्टत्तान
PAṬṬATTĀNA¦. This was a custom which was in force
in the ancient temples of Kerala from the 9th century
A.D. Paṭṭa means a ‘Sanskrit pandit’ ‘Paṭṭas’ is used
as its plural. To give instructions in śāstras and upani-
ṣads to the three upper classes and to read in public
at fixed times the Purāṇas, to make people more and
more religious minded, it was the custom to appoint
Paṭṭas in temples in ancient Kerala. This position which
was the loftiest that could be attained by a pandit of
those times was called by the name Paṭṭattāna. From
the 9th century A. D. references are found about
Paṭṭattāna in official records. In all important temples
a māvāratapaṭṭa used to be appointed. His duty was to
read and explain Mahābhārata to people.
<div n="NI"/>Ūrālars who conducted the day to day administration
of the temples and the Koiladhikāri who represented
the supreme authority, and the King, jointly granted
the Paṭṭattāna to deserving people. Pandits used to
come to temples and engage themselves in religions
[Page584-b+ 65]
polemics to make themselves worthy of the grant of
Paṭṭattāna. The Paṭṭas were entitled to some profits
from the temples. Records of the 3rd century Malayālam
Era regarding the routine expenditure in the Tiruvalla
temple mention about ‘five nāzhis of rice to be given to
each of the Paṭṭas within the temple’. Paṭṭas also were
given many lands free of tax as were given to Ūrālars.
In the Manalikkara order of 1236 A.D. and the
Padmanābhapura order of 1237 A.D. mention is made
about these grants. Paṭṭasthāna and Ūrāymasthāna
became hereditary after some time and began to
decline in importance.
<div n="NI"/>Even the meaning of the word Paṭṭattāna underwent a
change. In Cochin it meant the ceremony of giving
feasts followed by money-bags to invited brahmins by
the Kings to obtain puṇya for the dead members of the
royal family. The zamorins of Calicut meant by
Paṭṭattāna the act of giving fifty-one bags each con-
taining fiftyone rupees to the successful candidates in
śāstrārtha contests held at the Tali temple during the
period between Revatī and Tiruvātira (Ardrā) in the
month of Tulām. There is a difference of opinion
regarding the number of money-bags and the amount
in each. Ullūr S. Parameśvara Iyer in his Vijñāna-
dīpikā (page 148) states that the number of bags were
46 and the money in each was two hundred rupees. Of
these, twelve bags each were sanctioned for Prābhākara
Mīmāṃsā and Bhāṭṭamīmāṃsā, nine for Vyākaraṇa, and
thirteen for Vedānta. According to certain records 48
bags were given in the year 1679 A.D. Contests in
Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā were held on the southern
temple-tower gate of the Tali temple and in Vyākaraṇa
on the southern platform of the northern temple tower
gate of the same temple. The custom of giving hund-
red and one rupees each to one hundred and eight
scholars in Śrī Padmanābhasvāmī temple of Trivandrum
is also called Paṭṭattāna.
<LEND>
