<L>5156<pc>587-b<k1>पय्यन्नूर्<k2>पय्यन्नूर्
PAYYANNŪR¦ PĀṬṬU. This is a work in Malayālam
written during a very ancient period of Malayālam
literature. A complete edition of the same has not
yet been received. The plot as could be gathered
from records available is the following:
<div n="NI"/>Nīlakeśī, a woman born in a very noble family in
Triśśivaperūr did not have any sons though she accept-
ed many husbands for the sake of progeny. At last
she decided to perform penance. She left her place
alone on a pilgrimage and reached Kāccil, a famous
trading centre near Ezhimala. There lived a merchant
named Nambucetty alias Combucetty who was the
chief man of the place. He talked with Nīlakeśī and
accepted her as his wife. She got a son of him named
Nambuśāri Aran. Pleased at the birth of a son the
parents gave a grand feast at the big Payyannūr plains.
At that time the brothers of Nīlakeśī reached the place
in a ship. They climbed the fort-walls and tried to
[Page588-a+ 65]
enter the grounds. Some people objected to it and at that
time Nambucetty came there and beat them to death. On
hearing about this Nīlakesī left everything behind includ-
ing her son and went again on a pilgrimage. When
the son grew up the father taught his son everything
about trade and ships. The father gave him a new ship
for trading and the son taking along with him Pāṇḍyas,
Jonakas, Coliyas, Pāppavas and a Yavana and a huge
stock of goods put the ship into the sea and fearlessly
went for trading. After passing through many ports
and crossing another ocean he reached Ponmala (the
mountain of gold) and bartered his goods for a heap of
gold. He came back to his own land and was one day
playing chess with his father when a Sannyāsinī (female
ascetic) came there. When she was given alms she
requested to be allowed to talk to the young merchant.
The Sannyāsinī was none other than Nīlakeśī the
mother of Nambuśāri Aran, the young merchant. She
requested him to come to Payyannūr for a feast conduct-
ed by a woman there and he agreed to that. But the
father objected to it. But when the son persisted in
going, the father sent him with the sons of a cetty, a
few people from Maṇigrāma and a huge stock of goods
for trade. The poem ends there thus with 104 verses.
<div n="NI"/>There are different opinions about the story among
literary critics and historians. Gundert writes about it
thus:—“This is a piece of Malayālam work most ancient
of all that I have seen. This is a creation in Malayā-
lam before that language became diluted with meaning-
less indeclinable Sanskrit words.” According to
Gundert this poem was written before the poem
Rāmacarita was written and thus in the 3rd century
M.E.
<LEND>
