<L>5198<pc>589-b<k1>पिप्पलाद<k2>पिप्पलाद
PIPPALĀDA¦. An ancient sage belonging to the tradi-
tion of preceptors. (See under Guruparamparā). It is
said that this sage got that name because he was in the
habit of eating Pippalī in large quantities daily.
Praśnopaniṣad tells a story of how the sages Sukeśa,
Śaibya, Satyakāma (Kaśyapa), Kauśalya, Bhārgava and
Kabandhī went to Pippalāda seeking Ātmajñāna
(spiritual knowledge) and how he gave them instruct-
ions on the same.
<div n="NI"/>Padma Purāṇa gives the following information regard-
ing Pippalāda:—“Once Kuṇḍala, a brahmin residing
in Kurukṣetra, got a son named Sukarmā. Sukarmā's
parents were old and Sukarmā spent most of his time
looking after his sickly aged parents. Kuṇḍala taught
his son all the Vedas and Śāstras. At that time in the
gotra of Kaśyapa was born a brahmin named Pippa-
lāda. Controlling his senses and abandoning all
passions he did severe penance in a forest called
Daśāraṇya. The greatness of his penance made the
animals of the forest leave their mutual enmity and live
in perfect peace. Even the devas were astonished at
the power of his penance.
<div n="NI"/>Pippalāda did penance sitting as majestic and motion-
less as a mountain for a thousand years. Ants made a
sand-heap over him like a mole-hill. The sage sat
inside without any motion; poisonous black cobras
circled round him and yet the sage made no movement.
Three thousand years went by like that and then the
devas showered flowers on him. Brahmā appeared and
gave him the boon ‘Sarvakāmasiddhi’ (getting all that
is desired) and by the blessing of Brahmā he became a
very learned person also.
<div n="NI"/>Pippalāda became arrogant with the boon of ‘Sarva-
kāmasiddhi’ in his possession. One day while he was
sitting on a river-bank a swan appeared before him
and in clear tones said:—“Pippalāda, why are you so
proud of your greatness? I do not believe you have that
[Page590-a+ 64]
power of universal attraction. This art is arvācīna
(modern); you do not know Prācīna because
you are illiterate. You take pride unnecessarily
for having done penance for three thousand years. Do
you know Sukarmā, the wise son of Kuṇḍala? He is
the man who has acquired this power of attraction.
There is no mahājñanī (one possessing spiritual know-
ledge) like him anywhere else in this world. Sukarmā
has given no gifts, he has not practised meditation, he
has not performed yāgas or yajñas nor has he ever done
a pilgrimage. He has not done any of these virtuous
deeds and yet he is well-versed in all the śāstras and
Vedas. Even though he is a child you do not possess
enough knowledge to equal his. Why? Because he is
always engaged in the care and welfare of his parents.
You take pride in your achievements without reason.”
<div n="NI"/>Hearing that Pippalāda went and met Sukarmā. Pip-
palāda knew that the bird was none other than Brahmā
himself. They talked to each other for a long time and
then Pippalāda admitted that Sukarmā was a greater
man than himself. (Chapters 60-62, Padma Purāṇa).
<LEND>
