<L>5211<pc>591-a<k1>पितृतीर्थ<k2>पितृतीर्थ
PITṚTĪRTHA¦. The Kumbhīpākanaraka (the hell of
Kumbhīpāka) in the land of the manes is called
Pitṛtīrtha. There is a story about this in Devī Bhāga-
vata:
<div n="NI"/>Once the sage Durvāsas with his body smeared with
ashes and wearing sacred berries went to Pitṛloka mut-
tering “Śivaśaṅkara sarvātman śrīmātar bhuvaneśvari”.
The lord of the Pitṛloka received him with respect and
worshipped him. While they were talking, Durvāsas
heard cries of agony from somewhere and the sage
then asked Pitṛnātha thus: “Oh lord of the Pitṛs, I
have heard you described as a very virtuous man. How
can then such painful cries of distress be heard from
here? “Oh, I am dying beaten”, “Oh, I am being killed”
“Oh, I am dying” and “Oh, I am being burnt” are
some of the woeful shrieks I hear. What is the reason
for this?”
<div n="NI"/>Hearing this Dharmarāja said: “Great sage, this is in
fact a land of virtue. Nothing but righteous things are
done here. I can tell you from where you hear that
wail. The Yamapurī named Saṃyamanī is nearby.
There Yama sits to punish the sinners. Yama is a
dispenser of Justice and he has got several cruel and
mighty servants to carry out his orders. There are
eighty-six hells to punish the sinners and of these Kum-
bhīpāka is the most horrible. Great sinners like those
who insult the gods, fornicators and those who insult
their parents are put in this hell and punished. You
are now hearing the cries of such sinners from that
hell.”
<div n="NI"/>Durvāsas was curious to see the hell and the lord of
the Manes gave permission and asked his servants to
show Durvāsas the Kumbhīpākanaraka. The hell was
found to change into a heaven. The residents were
laughing, singing dancing and doing such acts of
happiness.
<div n="NI"/>The servants of Yama were astonished and they went
and reported to Yamarāja this sudden change. Yamarāja
was also amazed to hear the news. He immediately
rode on his vehicle, the buffalo, to the hell to learn the
details personally. He could not find out the cause for
the change. The place looked like the Svargaloka of
Indra. King Yama sent a messenger to Indra with the
news and Indra at first thought that it must be due to
[Page591-b+ 64]
some māyā and so came to the place swiftly on
his Airāvata. The news spread and one by one Brahmā,
Viṣṇu, the Aṣṭadikpālakas (the eight guardians of the
quarters) and all such people came to Kumbhīpāka-
naraka. Nobody could find an explanation for this
change and so Mahāviṣṇu accompanied by a few devas
went to Kailāsa and reported the matter to Śiva and
Śiva said smilingly “Oh Viṣṇu, all this happened
because of the greatness of the holy ashes. When the
sage Durvāsas bent down to have a good look at the
hell, particles of ashes from his body fell into the hell.
From that moment onwards Kumbhīpākanaraka be-
came a holy place for the Manes. This hell will hence-
forth be known as Pitṛtīrtha and those pitṛs who bathe
in the holy pond there will become virtuous people.
Do install on the shore of this pond an idol of mine,
a Śivaliṅga, and by my side the idol of Umā, which is
my power in an embodied form.” The devas returned
and did as they were directed.
<LEND>
