<L>5244<pc>592-b<k1>प्रभावती<k2>प्रभावती<h>V
PRABHĀVATĪ V¦. Daughter of the demon Vajranābha.
She was married to Pradyumna, son of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
<div n="NI"/>There was once a very valiant demon called Vajranābha.
He went into the valley of Meru and performed penance
to propitiate Brahmā. Brahmā appeared before him
and he got from him boons such as strength to conquer
and subdue all kings, the secret of leaving the body
and entering that of others etc. Empowered with these
boons he made Vajranābhapura his capital. He got a
daughter named Prabhāvatī. His brother Sunābha had
two daughters named Candramatī and Guṇavatī.
<div n="NI"/>While he was thus living there, he set out on a campaign
of victory. He conquered the whole world and then
turned his eyes towards Svarga. Going to Indraloka he
told thus: “Hi, son of Kaśyapa, I am also born of
Kaśyapa. Your mother Aditi and my mother Diti are
both wives of Kaśyapaprajāpati. You ruled over Svarga
till this time. Now, let me rule over it for some time.”
Indra was embarrassed by this logical challenge and could
not give any reply to him. Kaśyapaprajāpati was then
performing a long Yāga and Indra replied he would find
a solution to his demand when their father returned
after the Yāga. From that moment onwards Indra
started thinking of plans to destroy Vajranābha. He went
and sought help from Śrī Kṛṣṇa residing in Dvārakā.
Krsna promised to help him when the time came.
[Page593-a+ 64]
After returning to Devaloka, Indra started planning to
kill Vajranābha. Vajranābhapurī was surrounded by sky-
scraping fortresses and admission inside was restricted.
He, therefore, called the gaily loitering swans of Deva-
loka to his side and told them thus: “Look here, swan—
ladies. You should go to Vajranābhapurī and see
Prabhāvatī and then describe to her the beauty and
goodness of Pradyumna. Your description should be
such that Prabhāvatī should fall in love with Pradyumna.
After that you should go to Pradyumna and tell him
about Prabhāvatī in a similar way. On completing your
mission you should come and report to me.”
<div n="NI"/>Obeying the orders of Indra the swans flew to Vajra-
nābhapurī. They saw Prabhāvatī in a secluded spot and
told her just what they were asked to tell her. Then they
flew to the side of Pradyumna and told him about
Prabhāvatī. After successfully completing their mission
they flew to Devaloka. The marriage day of Prabhā-
vatī drew near. The swans went to Prabhāvatī again
and made her request her father to include the per-
formances of a dramatic troupe also in the programme
of marriage festivities. Vajranābha agreed and a troupe
was invited. The dramatic troupe comprised among
others many Yādava soldiers, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Pradyumna
and his brothers, all in disguise. Their drama was Rāmā-
yaṇa. The performance was superb and even Vajranābha
stood amazed at their skill. The troupe was encamped in
another palace and treated as royal guests. The compa-
nion maid of Prabhāvatī, Sūcīmukhī, united her with
Pradyumna during the dark hours of the night and they
spent the nights in amorous sports. The daughters of
Vajranābha's brother, Candravatī and Guṇavatī came
to know of these secret meetings and they requested
Prabhāvatī to find out suitable persons among the Yā-
davas for them also to enjoy with. Prabhāvatī intro-
duced them to Gada and Sāmba both sons of Kṛṣṇa.
The amorous sports of all of them continued freely
during the nights.
<div n="NI"/>When things progressed so far, Indra and Kṛṣṇa persuaded
Pradyumna to kill Vajranābha. Pradyumna started a
war with Vajranābha and in the great battle that en-
sued Pradyumna killed Vajranābha. Pradyumna and
his brothers then took the demon girls to Dvārakā.
Pradyumna, Gada and Sāmba married Prabhāvatī,
Candravatī and Guṇavatī respectively. By this time
Kaśyapaprajāpati returned to Devaloka after his long
yāga. (Viṣṇu Purāṇa, Chapters 91 to 95).
<LEND>
