<L>5287<pc>599-a<k1>प्रकृति<k2>प्रकृति
PRAKṚTI¦; PURUṢA. Prakṛti (matter) and Puruṣa
(spirit) are two basic factors essential for production of
the Prapañca (the visible world which is the scene of
manifold action) as man and woman are for the product-
ion of progeny. From Puruṣa (male), Prakṛti (female)
originated and then they together created the Prapañca.
The Vedas and Purāṇas make statements everywhere
regarding Prakṛti and Puruṣa and three of the most
important ones are given below:
<div n="NI"/>1) ‘Pra’ means ‘principal’ and ‘Kṛti’ means ‘creation’.
Therefore the word is meant to convey the meaning
‘one that is the principal factor for creation’, ‘Pra’ means
[Page599-b+ 65]
‘sāttvic’, ‘Kṛ’ means ‘rājasic’ and ‘ta’ means ‘tāmasic’
and the word ‘Prakṛti’ thus conveys the power of the
three guṇas’. ‘Pra’ means ‘before’ and ‘Kṛti’ means
creation and so Prakṛti means that which existed be-
fore creation.
<div n="NI"/>Before creation Prakṛti lay merged with the Supreme
Spirit without separate existence. But when the desire
for creation was aroused, this Supreme Spirit divided
itself into Prakṛti and Puruṣa. Then the right half
becomes ‘Puruṣa’ and the left half ‘Prakṛti’ Even though
they are thus two yogīndras (kings among sages)
they see themselves as merged with the eternal One like
fire and heat and assert the truth Sarvaṃ Brahma-
mayam (everything is Brahman, the Supreme Spirit).
It was this basic Prakṛti that took forms as the five
goddesses, Durgā, Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, Sāvitrī and
Rādhā. (9th Skandha, Devī Bhāgavata).
<div n="NI"/>2) Puruṣa is the vital sentient Truth that sets in action
the entire Prapañca. This Puruṣa is Supreme among
the Supreme, beyond human comprehension, without
form, colour, name, without origin, growth, change or
end, residing in himself and that which can only be
imagined to exist. This puruṣa has got two different
forms, the visible and the invisible and also a third
imaginary one, time. The sages call Puruṣa the Sūkṣma-
prakṛti (The subtle all-pervading spirit, the supreme
soul). This Sūkṣmaprakṛti which cannot be measured
by any unit of measure, is not attached to anything, is
imperishable, is without decrepitude, is immovable and
is without the senses of sound, touch smell or form.
This Prakṛti endowed with the three guṇas, without
beginning or end is eternal, is the root cause of this
Prapañca. This Prakṛti pervaded over Prapañca from
the beginning of the great Deluge to the beginning of
creation. Brahmajñānins who were great seers and who
knew the truth of the Vedas speak about Prakṛti thus:
“There was no night or day then, neither the earth
nor the sky, neither light nor darkness. There was no-
thing but this. There was only one Brahman merged in
which were Prakṛti and Purusa, a brahman which
could not be understood by any of the five senses nor by
intelligence. It was from the supreme being of Viṣṇu
that the two forms Prakṛti and Puruṣa originated.
These two were separated from Viṣṇu at the time of
the great deluge and again joined together at the
time of creation. The form of Viṣṇu from which these
occurred was termed Time. During the last great deluge
this visible Prapañca merged with it and so, this deluge
was called Prākṛtapralaya. Time is eternal, having no
end and so the process of Sṛṣṭi, Sthiti and Saṃhāra
(creation, existence and destruction) continued without
any interruption.
<div n="NI"/>After that, during Pralaya (deluge), Prakṛti and Puruṣa
stand apart due to equality of the guṇas, Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas in Prakṛti. Viṣṇu in the form of Time starts
the work to join them both together. Then when the
time of creation came Viṣṇu, the Supreme Being, the
supreme soul, the god of all living beings, omnipresent
and omnipotent by his will entered the emotionless
Puruṣa and emotional Prakṛti and created sensations in
them. Smell is the sense which creates sensation in one
by its nearness to it. Just like that Viṣṇu by his very
presence near them created disturbances in them. It is
Viṣṇu, the best of Puruṣas, who acts as Prakṛti which
can disturb and which can be disturbed, which exists
[Page600-a+ 65]
in states of contraction and expansion. It is Viṣṇu, the
god of the gods, who exists in forms of Sūkṣma and
Sthūla, and as the great tattva and as the devas like
Brahmā.
<div n="NI"/>The Mahattattva originated from Prakṛti, which was
existing as emotionless due to the equalisation of the
three guṇas, when at the time of creation Viṣṇu, Truth
in the form of Kṣetrajña (knower), merged with Pra-
kṛti. The Mahattattva in its three forms, Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas lay enveloped by Prakṛti just as a seed
is covered by its husk. From this Mahattattva originat-
ed the three egos, Vaikārika, Taijasa and Tāmasa, the
cause of the Pañcabhūtas. Because that ego contained
the three guṇas it became the cause of the origin of the
bhūtas (elements) and indriyas (senses). Ego pervaded
the Mahattattva just as the Mahattattva pervaded
(Aṃśa 1, Chapter 2, Viṣṇu Purāṇa).
<div n="NI"/>3) In the beginning during the Deluge the world was
all water. Then Śiva tore open his thigh and dropped
a drop of blood in the waters. It became a huge egg. He
broke it and from it came out Puruṣa and from Puruṣa
he made Prakṛti for the creation of the Prapañca. These
two, Prakṛti and Puruṣa, created the Prajāpatis and
they in turn created the prajās. Puruṣa seeing the vast
creation going on due to him became arrogant and
Śiva chopped off his head. Śiva became repentant of his
hasty deed later. To atone for his sin he took the skull
in his hand and vowed that he would ever carry a skull in
his hand and that he would live in cremation grounds.
The two halves of the great egg became ākāśa and
bhūmi (earth and sky). (Taraṅga 2, Kathāpīṭhalambaka,
Kathāsaritsāgara).
<LEND>
