<L>5290<pc>600-a<k1>प्रलय<k2>प्रलय
PRALAYA¦ (Destruction). Pralaya is of four kinds. The
first is nityapralaya. This is the destruction going on daily
for all animate and inanimate objects born on earth.
The second is Brāhmapralaya or naimittikapralaya. The
third is Prākṛtapralaya. This is the great deluge made by
prakṛti (nature) at the end of a thousand Caturyugas
(four yugas). The fourth is ātyantikapralaya. This is the
union of the soul with the Supreme Being due to Jñāna.
Of the above the Brāhmapralaya, or naimittikapralaya
happens at the end of a Kalpa or a day of Brahmā or
a thousand yugas. The nature of this pralaya is as
follows: At the end of a thousand yugas the world
will look famished. Then there will be excessive
drought for a hundred years together and everything
in this world would be destroyed then. Then Mahā-
viṣṇu, lord of everything in this universe, would pre-
sent himself in the seven big rays of the Sun and
drink to emptiness all the waters of all the three
worlds, earth, ocean and pātāla. Then by the divine
power of Mahāviṣṇu the seven rays of the Sun which
had grown fat by drinking this water would become
seven separate Suns. These Suns would burn all the
three worlds including Pātāla. Then the earth would
look like the back of a tortoise (Kūrmapṛṣṭha) At
that time Rudra, equal in brilliance to Kālāgni, would
from beneath burn the pātāla sending breaths from
Ādiśesa. After pātāla Kālāgnirudra would burn the
[Page600-b+ 65]
earth and then the heavens. Because of this all the
worlds would look like globes of fire. Then the inhabit-
ants of these worlds would go to Maharloka unable to
bear the heat and from there to Janaloka. Thus Viṣṇu
in the form of Rudra would destroy everything.
<div n="NI"/>Then from the face of Viṣṇu would originate clouds
and lightning in different forms. Those clouds would
rain incessantly for a hundred years and destroy the
fire prevailing everywhere. When the rains become
unbearable Vāyu would encroach upon the seats of the
Saptarṣis in the ocean and by the breath of Viṣṇu
destroy all the clouds. At that time Viṣṇu, lord of all,
would lie on the back of Ādiśeṣa in that one big
ocean drinking vāyu (air). Viṣṇu will lie thus for a
period of a Kalpa in yogic slumber meditating on
Vāsudeva taking the name Madhusūdana and form
of Brahmā praised by the siddhamunis inside the
ocean. After that he would take the form of Brahmā
and start creation.
<div n="NI"/>In Prākṛtapralaya this whole universe would lie in
extinction for a period of two parārddhas. One
parārddha is 100000000000000000 years (one followed
by seventeen zeroes) and so the period of a prākṛta-
pralaya is double the above number of years. The world
would then come into the grip of a great drought;
fire would break out and burn away everything in
this world from Mahattattva to Viśeṣa. Then prompted
by the desire of Viṣṇu, pratisañcaraṇa (back into
nature) would occur. Then Jala (water) would
absorb the guṇas of bhūmi like gandha (smell) and
when the qualities of the earth are thus absorbed the
earth would merge with pralaya. Jala is rasātmaka.
Agni will absorb the rasa of Jala and Jala would be
kindled. The guṇa of Agni is form and is in the form
of Sun. Vāyu would absorb it and Agni would be
destroyed. Vāyu would then become powerful and
shake the world. The quality of Vāyu is touch and the
ether would absorb that guṇa of Vāyu and Vāyu would
be destroyed. The quality of ether is sound and it
would be absorbed by the elements. If the elements
are absorbed one by one the earth would merge into
water (Jala) and Jala in Agni, and Agni in Vāyu and
Vāyu in ether and ether in Ahaṅkāra (ego). Ahaṅkāra
would merge in Mahattattva. This Mahattattva would
be absorbed by Prakṛti. Prakṛti has got two forms:—
Vyakta and Avyakta (Manifest and Un-manifest). The
Vyakta would merge with Avyakta. Puruṣa is single,
pure and without decay. But he is also part of Para-
mātmā (the Supreme Being). So Prakṛti and Puruṣa
would both merge into the Supreme Being. There are
no distinctions, fabrications in Paramātmā, the lord of
all. It is only an existence. It is such a Paramātmā
that should be known and which itself is knowledge.
The Paramātmā is beyond the Ātmā (soul). It is in
such an indescribable Paramātmā that all are dissolv-
ed during a Prākṛtapralaya. (Chapter 368, Agni
Purāṇa).
<LEND>
