<L>5313<pc>601-b<k1>प्रमोहिनी<k2>प्रमोहिनी
PRAMOHINĪ¦. A Gandharva maiden. Pramohinī and
four Gandharva maidens were absolved from their cur-
ses by a drop of water from the river Narmadā. The
story recounted to Yudhiṣṭhira by Nārada is as follows:
Five Gandharva maidens Pramohinī, Suśīlā, Susvarā,
Candrikā and Sutārā were friends. Pramohinī was the
daughter of Śukasaṅgīti, Suśīlā that of Suśīla, Susvarā
of Svaravedī, Candrikā that of Candraka and Sutārā
of Suprabha. On a day in spring all the five went about
collecting flowers in a forest. As they went on walking
they reached the pond named Acchoda. They bathed in
that pond and after that made an idol of Ambikā with
[Page602-a+ 65]
clay and adorned it with golden ornaments. Putting
marks on it with Kumkum (Saffron) and Candana (San-
dalwood-paste) they danced around the idol with devo-
tional songs. As they were doing so, the eldest son of
sage Vedanidhi came to bathe in the Acchoda pond.
He was very charming to look at with eyes like lotus,
broad chest and round and brawny hands. He looked
like another Kāmadeva (Cupid). He was wearing a
deer-hide and around his waist was a yellow waist-band
of Muñja grass. The five girls were attracted by the
ascetic youth and stopping their dancing they at first
thought of making him their guest. The more the girls
looked at him the more they saw a resemblance of Kāma-
deva in him and they decided to make him their hus-
band. The girls started to approach him with amorous
looks and perplexed by this move, the ascetic youth
fled away from the place. The girls searched for him
everywhere and he was not to be found. They found an
emptiness on all sides. They thought that perhaps he
might be a magician. They felt themselves in the plight
similar to that of the gopīs who searched for the missing
Kṛṣṇa. Somehow taking courage they reached their homes
and fell down before their mothers. The mothers asked
them why they were so late and they replied they knew
not the passage of time speaking with the Kinnarīs who
arrived there. Their bodies were hot and the mothers
thought that it might be due to their brisk walking for
such a long distance.
<div n="NI"/>Telling a lie like that to hide their secret, they lay on
the ground thinking about him and him alone. They
did not make the Kelīmayūra (peacock kept for pleas-
ure) dance, did not teach the parrot in the cage, did
not pet the mongoose nor did they converse with
their pet Śārikā. The night seemed to them like a yuga
and as soon as it was morning they ran up to the Acchoda
pond. The brahmin boy came there that morning also
for bathing. The five girls encircled him and requested
him to marry them. He made several excuses and tried
to get away from them. Then Pramohinī breaking the
circle went and caught hold of him by his legs, Suśīlā
and Susvarā caught hold of his hands, Sutārā embraced
him and Candrikā kissed him on his cheeks. At last in des-
pair the brahmin boy cursed them and turned them into
devils. The girls were not to be subdued like that. They
also cursed him in return and made him also a devil.
All the devils formed like that by curses and counter-
curses lived in the same place in the forest. After a
long time one day the sage Lomaśa came that way by
chance and the burning effulgence of Lomaśa due to his
severe penance made him unapproachable to the devils
and they stood at a great distance from him. But the
brahmin devil by the strength of his penance in his
previous life knew Lomaśa and falling before him in
prostration told him everything that had happened.
Lomaśa was greatly moved by his story and he took
them to the banks of the river Narmadā. At that time
a wind blew and drops of water from the river, changed
them into their original forms and they stood praising
Narmadā. Then following the advice of Lomaśa the
brahmin boy married the five girls and lived on the
shores of Narmadā bathing in it, drinking its water and
worshipping it. They lived there for long happily and
then attained Viṣṇuloka. (Chapter 22, Padma Purāṇa)
<LEND>
