<L>5320<pc>602-b<k1>प्राणधर<k2>प्राणधर
PRĀṆADHARA¦. A carpenter of Purāṇic fame.
<div n="NI"/>There were two celebrated carpenters in the country of
Kāñcī named Prāṇadhara and Rājyadhara when King
Bāhubala was ruling that country. They learnt many
mechanical arts in carpentry and architecture from the
great architect, Mayāsura. Prāṇadhara, the elder
brother, became an addict to wine and women and
gambling and lost all his wealth. Rājyadhara gave a
portion of his wealth to his brother and before long
both became poor. Then Prāṇadhara found out a plan
and they both together made a mechanical bird and tying
a rope to its legs sent it into the treasure-house of the
King through a window. The bird picked up diamonds
or ornaments which it could carry in its beak and came
back to them. This continued daily for some days and
then Rājyadhara advised his brother to stop it acquaint-
ing him with the dangers if it was ever found out.
But Prāṇadhara did not heed the advice and continued
the theft. When the keeper of the treasury found things
missing he was worried. He mused: “Doors are not
open. Can it be rats? No, there has never been a single
rat here before. Then how did it happen?” Thinking
thus he went and reported the matter to the king. The
[Page603-a+ 64]
King was confident of the keeper. Soon he put guards over
the treasure-house to keep watch over it at night. Little
knowing that he was being watched Prāṇadhara put
his bird into action that night also. The watchmen
caught hold of the rope as soon as the bird came out with
the booty from the treasure-house. Prāṇadhara knew
that the trick had been found out and he rushed to
his brother and told him what had happened. Immedi-
ately Prāṇadhara made a Vimāna and escaped from the
place with his family. Rājyadhara also made a Vimāna
and escaped. When he had travelled in the Vimāna for
four hundred Kātas (Kāta=four miles) he reached a
sea-shore and then leaving the Vimāna there started
walking. On the way getting tired he slept inside a
garden. When he woke up, a man on a peacock came to
his side and said “You live here. When you are hungry
and feel like taking food go to the second floor of this
house and you will find there whatever you want.”
The visitor disappeared and he found a house in front
of him. When he had finished his daily ablutions he
went inside the house which was empty. But when he
went up he saw ample food in gold vessels arranged there.
He never heard about his brother again. (Taraṅga 9,
Ratnaprabhālambaka, Kathāsaritsāgara).
<LEND>
