<L>5404<pc>606-b<k1>प्रायश्चित्त<k2>प्रायश्चित्त
PRĀYAŚCITTA¦. In ancient Bhārata sacred injunctions
existed about religious rites to be performed for the
atonement of sins committed. The following are a few
of them.
<div n="NI"/>Murder is that act which ends in loss of life. One who
kills a brahmin is a Brahmaghātaka. Even if murder is
actually committed by one man, all those involved in
a conspiracy for murder are murderers. If death occurs
while treating a patient it is no murder. If death
occurs when you punish your son, disciple or wife it is
no sin. If he who has killed a brahmin or a cow
commits suicide he will be absolved from his sin. Or he
should go about begging with a skull and the organ of
generation of any animal. If he spends twelve years
begging eating little and with repentance in his heart
the Brahmaghātaka will be absolved of his sin and
he will become pure. If the murder is done to serve a
purpose of his he should live as a beggar for twelve
years but if it is not done to gain any end of his, he
need live only for six years as a beggar. If a brahmin
attempts to murder another brahmin he should observe
the above vow for three years. If the attempt is made
by a Kṣatriya he should double the period; if by a
Vaiśya or Śūdra, triple the period If a brahmin kills
a Kṣatriya he need observe only three fourths of the
prāyaścitta. If a brahmin kills a Vaiśya or Śūdra he
need observe only an eighth part of the prāyaścitta. If he
kills a woman he should observe the punishment fixed
for killing a Śūdra.
<div n="NI"/>If a brahmin does ‘gohatyā’ (killing a cow) he should
practise penance drinking Pañcagavya (five products of
the cow taken collectively). He should sleep in a cow-
shed and go about feeding the cow and should also give
away cows as gift. If a gohatyā is committed by a per-
son of any other caste, he need observe only three
fourths of the prāyaścitta. Hitting the cows by fists,
piercing their body with nails and cutting their horns
are to be classified under gohatyā. If one kills a cat
[Page607-a+ 64]
mongoose, frog dog, or a bird, one should drink milk
for three days.
<div n="NI"/>Though wine, date-palm-juice sugar-cane-juice,
black-palm-juice, tamarind-juice and toddy are intoxi-
cants they are not classified under alcoholic liquors.
Real liquor or surā is that made from rice flour.
Drinking liquor is prohibited to Brahmins, Kṣatriyas
and Vaiśyas. If any one of these castes drinks he should
drink water after performing penance or live eating
pippalī (long pepper) for a year or eat oil cake at night
for a year. If one drinks water in a pot used for taking
liquor one should observe the prāyaścitta for seven days.
If he drinks water from a cāṇḍāla he should observe the
prāyaścitta for six days. If one eats rice from a cāṇḍāla
one should observe Cāndrāyaṇa. (an expiatory penance
of decreasing and then increasing food according to the
waxing and waning of the moon). If one eats food in
the house of a Śūdra during times of distress, one
would be absolved of the sin by repentance alone.
Taking another man's property and appropriating it to
himself is called theft. He who steals gold should be
struck on the head by a wooden pestle by the king and
killed. Alternatively he should live for twelve years
with matted hair, eating one time a day only such
things as leaves, fruits and roots and lying on earth. He
who steals diamonds, pearls, corals, copper, silver, iron,
bronze and granite stones should fast for twelve years.
He who enjoys sexual intercourse with his father's wife,
own sister, daughter of his preceptor or wife of the
preceptor should burn himself in a hot iron pot. Alter-
natively he should embrace a red hot iron idol of a
woman and die. (Chapters 183 and 184, Agni Purāṇa).
<LEND>
