<L>5434<pc>610-a<k1>पृथूदर<k2>पृथूदर
PṚTHŪDARA¦. A celebrated Yakṣa. This Yakṣa got a
daughter named Saudāminī. Her father took her to
different mountains to entertain her. One day while
she was playing with her companion Kapiśabhrū she
met a Yaksaputra named Aṭṭahāsa. They fell in love
and Saudāminī's father agreed to their marriage and
fixed it. After fixing the marriage Pṛthūdara took his
daughter to his house. Next day her companion Kapi-
śabhrū came to Saudāminī in a sorrowful mood and
when she asked her the reason she said “Friend, how
am I to report to you this sad news. On my way to you
I passed through a garden named Citrasthala in the
valley of the Himālayas. To have some sport with the
love-stricken Aṭṭahāsa his friends staged a drama in
which Aṭṭahāsa was made Vaiśravaṇarāja and his brother
Dīptaśikha, Nalakūbara, and the rest, his ministers.
They were thus acting and enjoying when Nalakūbara
himself came that way and seeing his servant
Aṭṭahāsa in the robes and form of his father was
angry and calling Aṭṭahāsa to his side said: “A servant
like you is ambitious of becoming a king. Let this ambi-
tion be the cause of your downfall. You will be born
as man.” Aṭṭahāsa was shocked and he craved pardon
“Oh Lord, I did this only for some entertainment. I did
not do it with any desire for a big position. Pardon
me for my mistake. Nalakūbara then by his divine
power understood everything and taking pity on him
consoled him and said “She with whom you are in love
will be your wife in your life as man. Your brother
[Page610-b+ 64]
Dīptaśikha will then be born as your son. Both of
you will then be released from the curse. Dīptaśikha
after ruling the country for some time will also be free
from this curse.” Aṭṭahāsa and Dīptaśikha soon dis-
appeared by the power of the curse.
<div n="NI"/>Aṭṭahāsa was born as king of Trigartta in the name of
Pavitradhara and Saudāminī became his wife. A son
was born to them named Dīptaśikha and as soon as he
was born the parents were released from the curse and
entered heaven. (Śaśāṅkavatīlambaka, Kathāsarit-
sāgara, Taraṅga 6).
<LEND>
