<L>5453<pc>611-a<k1>पूजाविधि<k2>पूजाविधि
PŪJĀVIDHI¦. Chapter 155 of Agni Purāṇa states the
various acts of worship that should be done daily
and they are the acts of worship observed by all
brahmacārins during the time of Manusmṛti.
<div n="NI"/>You should rise up at Brāhmamuhūrta. Finish your ex-
cretory routine sitting facing north during daytime and
facing south during night time. If it is at dusk or dawn
it should be done as during day time. It should never
be done in public roads, water or grass. Wash with
sand after your excretions and then wash your teeth.
After that take your bath. Baths are of six kinds: Nitya-
snāna, Naimittikasnāna, Kāmyasnāna, Kriyāṅgasnāna,
Malakarṣaṇasnāna and Kriyāsnāna. Any religious act
done without a bath is of no use. Therefore you should
bathe early. Well-water is good for bathing, water from
a fountain is better, water of a lake is much better,
river-water is still better and water of a tīrtha
[Page611-b+ 65]
is still better. The water of the river Gaṅgā is the
best.
<div n="NI"/>After washing after excretions you should enter into
the waters and wash again and then wash your body.
While washing you should recite the following mantras
“Hiraṇyavarṇaḥ, Śanno devīḥ, āpo hi ṣṭhā and idam-
āpaḥ.” You should submerge yourself in the waters and
recite the mantras there under the water. You should
also recite Aghamarṣaṇa sūkta or the Ṛk named
Drupada. Gāyatrī should be chanted specially. After
the Japa you should rub dry with a cloth your head
and body and then offer water to the devas and manes.
Then you should worship with water reciting Puruṣa-
sūkta.
<div n="NI"/>You should give way to anybody carrying a load, a
pregnant woman and preceptors. Never look at the
Sun at the time of rising or setting. Never look at the
reflection of the moon in waters. Never look at a nude
woman. Do not peep into a well. Never trample over
clothes and sacred ashes. Never enter the bedroom or
the treasure room of another man. Those who rub mud
blocks against mud block, cut their teeth or bite their
nails will perish. Never enter a house through any
other opening than its proper gate. Never interrupt
when others are talking. Never use the clothes of ano-
ther man. Tell everybody ‘Bhadram’ ‘Bhadram’ (well
well). Never speak to displease anybody. Never walk
on the shadow of an individual. Do not pass through
the space between two respectable persons sitting and
talking. Do not look at falling stars. Never mention
the name of another river while in a river. Do not
scratch your body with both your hands. Never cross a
river before offering water to the devas and manes. Do
not throw your excretions into the waters. Never
bathe naked. After bath you should pray to gods for
your welfare. Never take out a garland from your body
by yourself. Avoid dust from the hooves of donkeys
sticking to your body. Never laugh at low-caste people,
nor live with them nor live in their places. Never live
in a place where there are no rivers, doctors or a king.
Nor live in a place ruled by barbarous people or a
woman or by a number of people together. Never
talk with women during their period of menses. If you
have talked with them think of Viṣṇu. Never laugh,
sneeze or yawn without covering your mouth. Wise
man should hide the disgrace to one superior to him-
self and protect the words of the superior or his own.
Never encourage too much activity of the senses nor
should you check the pressure of excretions. Do not
belittle even the smallest of ailments or the smallest of
enemies. If you walk through public roads you should
wash yourself. Never walk bearing water or fire. Do
not hiss in the presence of respectable and virtuous
people. Do not place one leg over the other leg. Never
speak directly or indirectly things which are unpleasant
to others. Avoid contempt of Vedas, Kings, sages,
science and devas. Do not be jealous of women nor do
place confidence in them. Always listen to virtuous talks,
be devoted to the gods and observe righteous acts daily.
On your birthday worship the moon, gods and brahmins.
Never take an oil bath on the fourth (caturthī), sixth
(ṣaṣṭhī) and eighth (aṣṭamī) days of lunar fortnight.
Throw away your excretions far away from home.
Never be unfriendly with venerable and noble
people.
<LEND>
