<L>5479<pc>615-a<k1>पुञ्जिकस्थला<k2>पुञ्जिकस्थला
PUÑJIKASTHALĀ¦. A nymph. She was the servant-
maid of Bṛhaspati. One day she was collecting flowers
for her Guru in a garden when a set of young men
and women came to the garden for amorous sports.
They were roaming about in the garden in pairs doing
all sorts of erotic acts and Puñjikasthalā stood watching
them for some time with passion aroused in her. She
returned to the āśrama thinking all the way about her
miserable lot of having no husband to enjoy a similar
life. She was full of lust when she returned to the
āśrama and on seeing Bṛhaspati she caught hold of him
by the hand and pleaded to satisfy her passion.
Bṛhaspati was angry at this improper request and
cursed her “You have become rotten. You have be-
come lustful by seeing the amorous sports of others.
May you be born as a monkey. Get out of this āśrama.”
Puñjikasthalā came to her senses and regretting her
hasty act begged her Guru to grant her release from
the curse. Bṛhaspati felt pity on her and said “Go and
enjoy to your full sexual life with a lover whom you
like best. Then you will get a son from the vitality of
Śiva. When that son is born you will be released from
the curse and you will go to heaven.”
<div n="NI"/>She became immediately a monkey girl named Añjanā
and started living in a forest of that name itself. She
fell in love with a monkey boy named Kesarī there and
lived for many years enjoying an amorous life. She did
not get a child even after several years and then she
prayed to Śiva for a child.
<div n="NI"/>It was at that time that Pārvatī and Parameśvara
played amorous sports in the form of monkeys and
Pārvatī became pregnant. Pārvatī expressed reluctance
to be the mother of a monkey child and then Śiva by
his divine powers deposited his semen virile through
Vāyubhagavān (god of wind) into the womb of
Añjanā who was then praying to him for a child.
Coming to know of this through Nārada and fearing
that his lordship over the monkeys would be lost if
such a monkey were born to Añjanā Bāli poured into
the belly of Añjanā molten liquid of pañcaloha (five
metals). Añjanā was not the least injured and she
gave birth in due course to a monkey son who became
the celebrated Hanūmān, the life-force of the Rāma-
Rāvaṇa tussle. (Pūrvakāṇḍa, Kamba Rāmāyaṇa;
Kiṣkindhā Kāṇḍa, Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa).
<div n="NI"/>This Puñjikasthalā belongs to the famous set of eleven
devakanyakās. They are: Menakā, Sahajanyā, Karṇikā,
Puñjikasthalā, Ṛtusthalā, Ghṛtācī, Pūrvacitti, Ullocā,
Pramlocā, Urvaśī and Vīśvācī. These were the celebrat-
ed courtezans of Svarga. (Chapter 123, Ādi Parva).
[Page615-b+ 64]
Puñjikasthalā was the dancer at the court of Kubera.
(Chapter 10, Sabhā Parva). She took part in the
Janmotsava of Arjuna. (Chapter 122, Ādi Parva).
<LEND>
