<L>5496<pc>616-b<k1>पुरञ्जन<k2>पुरञ्जन
PURAÑJANA¦. A king. The story of this king was told to
king Prācīnabarhis by Nārada to illustrate the truth
that those who kill yajña cows on earth would surely
suffer its consequences at one time or another.
<div n="NI"/>Purañjana once started on a tour after killing a few
yajña cows. His aim was to build a new palace. After
walking alone for a long time he reached the neigh-
bourhood of Himālayas. While wandering in the forests
he saw a beautiful garden and by its side a big castle
with nine tower-gates. It was the residence of the
Gandharva lady Purañjanī. She had innumerable girl
companions and her castle was guarded by a five-hooded
cobra called Prajāgiri.
<div n="NI"/>Purañjanī fell in love with Purañjana at first sight
and their greetings and subsequent talks ended in their
marriage. Thus Purañjana became the husband of
Purañjanī and they lived happily an erotic life for a
hundred years. Then one day the king went for hunting
alone. Even that separation for a little while from
Purañjanī was unbearable to Purañjana and he returned
to his palace soon. Purañjanī did not come to receive
him. On enquiry her companions informed the king
that Purañjanī was lying on the floor with grief unable
to bear the separation from the king. Purañjana con-
soled her and they lived again for many years in per-
fect happiness. Then one thing happened.
<div n="NI"/>Kāla had a daughter named Kālakanyakā who lived
a very wicked and vicious life. She wanted to get marri-
ed but nobody wanted to be her husband. Śhe went
about in search of a husband. Pūru became her husband
for some time but she was soon divorced by him. She
approached a Yavana king named Bhaya who had a
brother called Prajvara. Bhaya did not want to take
that woman as his wife and so sent her back with a
boon that she could stand in hiding and enjoy all
men she liked. He sent his brother Prajvara for her
help. She roamed about like that for some time and
came back again to Bhaya. Kālakanyakā, Bhaya and
Prajvara joined together and gathering a strong army
attacked Purañjana. A grim battle followed which
lasted for several years in the end of which Purañjana
was defeated and taken captive. While he was being
taken as a prisoner a herd of wild cows attacked Pura-
ñjana and he was killed. After that he was born as a
princess named Vaidarbhī. Malayadhvaja, king of
Pāṇḍya, married her and got seven celebrated sons.
Agastya married the daughter of Malayadhvaja.
(4th Skandha, Bhāgavata).
<LEND>
