<L>5549<pc>622-a<k1>पुष्कराक्ष<k2>पुष्कराक्ष<h>I
PUṢKARĀKṢA I¦. A King of Purāṇic fame.
<div n="NI"/>There was once a King called Bhadrākṣa in Takṣa-
śilānagara. He worshipped Bhagavatī with 108 lotus
flowers daily in order to obtain a son. One day he
found one flower missing and the brave king tore open
his heart and made the number complete. The goddess
was pleased and she blessed him saying that he would
[Page622-b+ 65]
have a son worthy of becoming an emperor. Puṣkarākṣa
was the son thus born.
<div n="NI"/>The boy grew up and after crowing him as King
Bhadrākṣa left for the forests. Puṣkarākṣa worshipped
Śiva daily to get a suitable wife. After some time Śiva
blessed him saying that he would get a very good wife.
<div n="NI"/>One day he went for hunting. He saw a camel trying
to eat two cobras engaged in the act of mating. Instant-
ly the King sent an arrow against the camel and the
camel falling down turned into a Vidyādhara and that
Vidyādhara told the King thus:— “Oh King, there was
once a Vidyādhara named Raṅgamālī. A Vidyādhara
maiden named Tārāvalī was attracted by the hand-
some form of Raṅgamālī. She married him without the
consent of her parents. The angered father separated
them by a curse. The curse took effect and they soon
got separated losing their way in the forest. Pining to
see her husband Tārāvalī roamed about in the forests
and reached the other shore of the western sea. It was
a colony of ṛṣis and there was a fig tree there standing
in full blossom. Tārāvalī took the form of a beetle and
sat on the tree sucking honey. After some days Raṅga-
mālī also came to the place. On seeing her husband
she had emission and from the virile fluid was born a
fig fruit. After that both of them flew to the Gan-
dharva loka. I am Raṅgamālī. One day a sage
named Jitāsu came that way and this fruit fell before
him. From the fruit came out a beautiful maiden and
Jitāsu with his divine power understood the whole
story behind it and so took the girl to his āśrama and
named her Vinayavatī. Vinayavatī grew into a beauti-
ful maiden and stayed in the āśrama. One day by
accident I happened to see her and attracted by her
beauty tried to rape her. She cried aloud and hearing
the noise the sage came out and cursed me and turned
me into a camel. I pleaded for mercy and the sage
said I would be released from the curse when I was
killed by the future husband of Vinayavatī, Puṣkarākṣa
by name. Oh King, I am now released from the curse
and you should go to the forest named Surabhimāruta
on the other side of the western sea and marry that
maiden.”
<div n="NI"/>Puṣkarākṣa was pleased to hear this and the king going
back to the palace and entrusting the administration of
the state to his ministers left for the forest of Surabhi-
māruta. Reaching the shore of the western sea he was
thinking of ways to cross the sea when he saw a
Bhadrakālī temple nearby. When he went to the
temple he saw a violin in front of it and taking it he
played on it a few songs in praise of Kālī and went to
sleep in the temple. The goddess was pleased with his
songs and took the sleeping king to the other side of the
sea. When he woke up next morning he saw himself
on the other shore and was pleasantly surprised. He
walked about on the shore and saw an āśrama and
peeping in saw a sage sitting inside. On seeing the
king the sage told him thus “Oh Puṣkararāja, Vinaya-
vatī in search of whom you have come here has just
gone to pluck flowers for her worship. She will come
just now and you can then accept your wife of your
previous birth as your wife of this life.”
<div n="NI"/>The king wanted to know more about Vinayavatī
when the sage said she was his wife in his previous
birth also. Then the sage said: “Once there was a
Vaiśya called Dharmasena in Tāmralipti. He married
[Page623-a+ 64]
a girl named Vidyullekhā. All their wealth was stolen
by thieves and grief-stricken they attempted to commit
suicide by jumping into the fire. They saw two swans
flying towards them and without waiting for them to
reach them they committed suicide. In their next birth
they became a swan couple. They lived on a date tree
during rainy seasons. Once in a storm the tree
fell down and in the darkness each went its own way.
In the morning the male swan started searching for his
mate. In the end he found her in the lake of Mānasa
in Svarga. They lived there happily till the rainy
season was over and then they went and stayed on a
mountain. One day a forester killed the she-swan and
while coming with the dead swan in his hands he saw
a set of armed men coming that way and the frightened
forester threw the dead swan into a lake nearby.
The dead swan came in touch with the Mṛtasañjīvanī
herb in the pond and coming to life flew away.
<div n="NI"/>The husband swan went into another group of swans
and lived there in sorrow. One day a fisherman came
and caught all the swans in a net. At that time the she-
swan came there and finding her husband in the net
felt very sad. She was thinking of some way to get her
husband released from the net when a man came to
bathe in the pond. He wrapped the diamond necklace
of his in a cloth and placed it on the shore. The she-
swan took the necklace and flew making the fisherman
see everything before him. Seeing the swan going
with the necklace the fisherman went after it. The swan
flew to a mountain nearby and placed it on its top.
The fisherman started climbing up and the she-swan
then flew back and released her husband from the net.
One day while they were flying making a lotus as an
umbrella a hunter shot them down with arrows. Fortu-
nately the lotus fell on an idol of Śiva and by the power
of Śiva they were born in their next birth as a king
and a woman. The king is yourself and the woman is
Vinayavatī.”
<div n="NI"/>Puṣkarākṣa married her there and returning to his
land lived happily for a long period (Taraṅgā 2,
Śaśāṅkavatīlambaka, Kathāsaritsāgara).
<LEND>
