<L>5643<pc>630-a<k1>रक्तज<k2>रक्तज
RAKTAJA¦. A form assumed by Arjuna in his previous
birth. The following story is told in Padma Purāṇa
(Chapter 14) about Arjuna being reborn as such at the
meeting of Kali and Dvāpara yugas and Svedaja being
born as Karṇa during the same period.
<div n="NI"/>Once during a quarrel between Śiva and Brahmā the
former nipped off Brahmā's head. (For details see under
Brahmā). Some drops of sweat appeared on the fore-
head of the angry Brahmā, and from the sweat which
Brahmā wiped with his hand arose a person wearing a
thousand shields, bow and quiver. That person was
Svedaja. He asked Brahmā what he should do and
the former granted him permission to destroy Śiva. He
then approached Śiva with bow drawn and the frighten-
ed Śiva ran to Viṣṇu and sought refuge. Svedaja
followed Śiva and when Viṣṇu, seeing him, raised a
loud noise ‘Hum’. Śiva prostrated at Viṣṇu's feet. Śiva
extended the skull in his hand towards Viṣṇu request-
ing something to be given to him. Mahāviṣṇu, who had
nothing else to give Śiva, put his right hand into the
skull as alms, Śiva wounded the hand with his Śūla
(three-pronged weapon) and pure red blood began
flowing from the hand into the skull. The blood con-
tinued flowing for a thousand years in a length of fifty
yojanas and thickness of ten yojanas. At the end of
the period Viṣṇu asked whether the skull was not filled
yet, and looking into the skull with his three eyes Śiva
answered that it was full. Then Viṣṇu stopped the
flow of blood, and Śiva, in the presence of Viṣṇu, looked
into the blood for a thousand years and stirred it with his
hand. The blood gradually turned into a bubble, and
a person possessing thousand hands and as glowing as
fire appeared in the skull. He had a crown on his head
and he held in his hands a bow and quiver. He wore
gloves on his hands. And, that was Raktaja, an in-
carnation of Nararṣi.
<div n="NI"/>Looking at Raktaja, Śiva told Viṣṇu thus: “This master
in archery is Nara. You spoke Nara, and let his name,
therefore be Nara. Oh Nārāyaṇa, you both will be
called Naranārāyaṇas. This Nara will be of help to
you on behalf of the Devas and also in the sustenance
and protection of the world. He will further help you
to kill the asuras. Nara, the great intellectual that he
is, will become a muni, of surpassing wisdom. Brahmā's
divine fifth head possesses so much of effulgence. Nara
is created from that effulgence and also from the blood
from your hands and my look at it. He will annihilate
all enemies in war. He will be a terror to those persons
who cannot be conquered by you, Indra and the other
Devas.
<div n="NI"/>While Viṣṇu stood there amazed Raktaja praised him
and Śiva with folded hands and asked from the skull
[Page630-b+ 65]
what he should do. Then Śiva ordered him thus:
You kill this asura (Svedaja) created by Brahmā with
his own effulgence.” And Śiva led Raktaja out of the
skull by his hands and told him again:—“Look, here
lies the terrible person I spoke about made unconscious
by the cry of ‘Hum’ by Viṣṇu. Awake him immedia-
tely.” After having said this Śiva disappeared. Nara,
in the presence of Nārāyaṇa, kicked the unconscious
Svedaja with his left foot, and he came out of his un-
conscious state.
<div n="NI"/>The fierce fight that ensued between Raktaja and
Svedaja continued for two years. By then Svedaja had
lost everything but one of his shields and Raktaja had
only his two arms to fight with. At this stage Vāsudeva
(Viṣṇu) in great alarm went and asked Brahmā
whether Raktaja might not kill Svedaja. Brahmā
answered, ‘In the next birth Nara may defeat Svedaja’.
Saying ‘Right, let that be so’, Viṣṇu returned to the
battlefield and withdrew them from fighting with the
assurance that they would be given an opportunity to
fight again during the period of the Kali and the
Dvāpara yugas.
<div n="NI"/>Afterwards Viṣṇu directed Āditya (Sun) and Ākhaṇ-
ḍala (Indra) to look after Raktaja and Svedaja. He
told Āditya further:—“At the end of the Dvāpara
yuga you should see that Svedaja is reborn, in the
interests of the Devas, as your son. In the Yadu
dynasty will be born a very powerful fellow called
Śūra and he will have a very beautiful daughter named
Pṛthā. Durvāsas will advise her some mantras as a
boon and she will have some sons from the Devas
whom she will invoke with the mantras. With that
object in view, while in her periods, she would, at the
time of dawn gaze at you with love. Then he (Svedaja)
will be born as the son called Vasuṣeṇa of Kuntī, the
virgin.”
<div n="NI"/>The Sun-God agreed to obey the above instructions of
Viṣṇu and told him further:—“I shall procreate in the
virgin a very powerful and valiant son, who will become
well-known in the world as Karṇa. He will gift away
all wealth to brahmins.” After saying this Sūrya dis-
appeared.
<div n="NI"/>After this Viṣṇu told Indra as follows:—“You
should, at the end of the Dvāpara yuga see that this
Nara, born from blood, is reborn as an aspect of
yours on earth. King Pāṇḍu will one day go into the
forest with his wives, Kuntī and Mādrī, and he will
then become the object of an animal's curse. He will
therefore, in a spirit of renunciation, go to mount
Śataśṛṅga where he would ask Kuntī to become a
mother by another man. Unwilling to do so Kuntī
will desire to have sons by Devas, and when she prays
to you, you should favour her with this Nara as son.
<div n="NI"/>Devendra raised a legal objection to the above injunc-
tion of Viṣṇu as follows:—“You, who incarnated your-
self as Rāma in the twenty-seventh yuga of the last
Manvantara for the purpose of killing Rāvaṇa, killed
my son Bāli. Therefore I do not wish to procreate
Nara as my son.” To this objection of Indra Viṣṇu
assured him that as a penalty for the mistake of killing
Bāli, he would be a companion of Nara (Arjuna) who
would be born as Indra's son.
<div n="NI"/>According to the above terms and conditions fighting
between Raktaja and Svedaja ended. In the next
birth Raktaja was born as Arjuna and Svedaja as
[Page631-a+ 65]
Karṇa. Mahāviṣṇu incarnated himself as Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
The meeting of the three in the battle-field is well-
known.
<LEND>
