<L>5646<pc>631-a<k1>राम<k2>राम
RĀMA¦ (ŚRĪ RĀMA). The seventh incarnation of
Mahāviṣṇu, a very powerful king of the solar dynasty.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Genealogy.%} Descended from Viṣṇu thus: Brahmā-
Marīci-Kaśyapa-Vivasvān-Vaivasvata Manu-Mahā-
bāhu-Prasandhi-Kṣupa-Ikṣvāku-Vikukṣi-Śaśāda-
Kakutstha (Purañjaya)-Anenas-Pṛthulāśva-Prasenajit-
Yuvanāśva-Māndhātā-Purukutsa-Trasadasyu-Anaraṇya-
Hryaśva-Vasumanas-Sutanvā-Traiyyāruṇa-Satyavrata
(Triśaṅku)-Hariścandra-Rohitā va-Harita-Cuñcu-
Sudeva-Bharuka-Bāhuka-Sagara-Asamañjasa-
Aṃśumān-Bhagīratha-Śrutanābha-Sindhudvīpa-Ayutā-
yus-Ṛtuparṇa-Sarvakāma-Sudās-Mitrasakha (Kal-
māṣapāda)-Aśmaka-Mūlaka-Khaṭvāṅga-Dilīpa
(Dīrghabāhu)-Raghu-Aja-Daśaratha-Rāma.
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Reason for his birth.%} When Rāvaṇa was ruling over
Laṅkā as a terror to the world, evils and cruelties like
matricide, patricide, fratricide, killing of cows, hatred
for good people, children's death, abduction of women,
killing of munis, thefts etc. became rampant. When the
world became grief-stricken Bhūmidevī (Goddess of
earth) assumed the form of a cow and took refuge with
Indra in Svarga. She told him about the atrocities
committed by Rāvaṇa and the other Rākṣasas. Then
Indra took Bhūmidevī (cow) to Brahmā, who took
them to Śiva at Kailāsa as killing Rāvaṇa was beyond
his (Brahmā's) power. Śiva thought it improper on
his part to kill Rāvaṇa and so he took Brahmā and
others to Viṣṇu and submitted their grievance to him.
Viṣṇu consoled them by saying as follows:—“I have
decided to incarnate myself as the son of Daśaratha, king
of Ayodhyā. You Devas also should take birth on earth
to help me to kill Rāvaṇa and other evil Rākṣasas and
to protect Bhūmidevī and the good people on the
earth.” (Kamba Rāmāyaṇa, Pūrva Kāṇḍa).
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Birth%} King Daśaratha of the solar dynasty ruled
Kosala with Ayodhyā as his capital. Maharṣi Vasiṣṭha
was his family preceptor. With the cooperation of
eight ministers such as Sumantra and others he ruled
the country in the path of supreme welfare and pros-
perity. A daughter, Śāntā, was born to him of his wife
Kausalyā. Years passed by, yet he had no son. One
of those days King Lomapāda, close friend of Daśaratha
visited Ayodhyā. Lomapāda, who was childless
requested Dasaratha for Śāntā and she was given
as his adopted daughter by Daśaratha. Lomapāda gave
her in marriage to Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, who had once caused
rain-fall in Aṅga. (For details see under Ṛṣyaśṛṅga).
[Page631-b+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>To have a son, Daśaratha took as his second wife
Kaikeyī, daughter of the King of Kekaya and younger
sister of Yudhājit. But she turned out to be barren.
Then he married Sumitrā, daughter of the King of
Kāśī. Even after many years none of the three wives
of Daśaratha presented him with a son.
<div n="NI"/>One of those days Da aratha went deep into the forest,
hunting. While resting on the banks of river Sarayū
he heard a sound like that of an elephant drinking
water in the river. Without realising the fact that the
voice was that of the son of a muni filling water in a
pot for his aged parents, the King released an arrow
against him. When Da aratha walked to the spot, he
realised his mistake. He had hit unknowingly a brahmin-
boy, a muni's son. The boy lay wounded about to
die. The boy explained to Daśaratha who he was and
how he had come to the river to carry water to his
aged parents. After telling the King details about him
he breathed his last. Sobbing at his misadventure,
Daśaratha went to the aged parents of the dead boy
with the pot filled with water. The parents, who were
blind thought that it was their son who was
approaching them when Daśaratha revealed the sad
story to them. After cursing Daśaratha that he too
would die of separation from his son, the aged muni
expired; his wife also died in his funeral pyre. The
grief-stricken King returned to Ayodhyā.
<div n="NI"/>Only Vasiṣṭha and Sumantra were told about the
curse, which, though a cause for great sorrow, implied
that Daśaratha would have sons. Vasiṣṭha, therefore,
advised Da aratha to get the yajña, called putrakāmeṣṭi
performed by Ṛṣya ṛṅga. Accordingly the King invited
his daughter Śāntā and his son-in-law, Ṛṣyaśṛṅga
to Ayodhyā, and the yajña began. Ṛṣyaśṛṅga made
offerings in the sacred fire chanting the putrakāma
hymn. Then a divine person arose from the fire with a
golden vessel full of pudding (nectar of the Devas) and
disappeared again in the fire after giving the vessel to
Ṛṣyaśṛṅga. Ṛṣyaśṛṅga handed it over to Daśara-
tha, who as advised by the maharṣi divided the pudd-
ing between Kausalyā and Kaikeyī. They gave a part
of their shares of the pudding to Sumitrā also. The
three queens conceived, and in due course of time
Kausalyā and Kaikeyī delivered a son each and
Sumitrā two sons. The son of Kausalyā was named
Rāma, the son of Kaikeyī, Bharata, and sons of Sumitrā
were named Lakṣmaṇa and Śatrughna. (Vālmīki Rāmā-
yaṇa, Bālakāṇḍa).
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Boons granted to Kaikeyi.%} Before the sons were born to
Daśaratha, the mighty asura called Śambara once
attacked Devaloka. Daśaratha was at that time known
as Nemi, and he was a great friend of Indra, and on
his invitation Nemi, along with Kaikeyī, went to
Devaloka in a chariot. Nemi killed the asura army
within half an hour. Then Śambara assumed the
form of ten Śambaras and attacked Nemi from ten
points. In this context Nemi turned and twisted his
chariot in all the ten directions at the same time and
killed all the ten Śambaras and recaptured Svarga. It
was from that day onwards that Nemi came to be known
as Daśaratha.
<div n="NI"/>In the fight with the Sambaras on all points Daśaratha's
chariot was so violently shaken that the key of its axle
was about to slip off and fall down. Noticing the
threatened danger Kaikeyī applied her finger to the
[Page632-a+ 65]
proper place of the axle and thus averted the mishap.
When Daśaratha knew about this timely action of
Kaikeyī he was so very pleased that he asked her to
choose any two boons she desired, and she asked him
to keep the boons with him to be granted whenever
she requested for them. Daśaratha and Kaikeyī took
leave of Indra and returned to Ayodhyā. (Kamba
Rāmāyaṇa, Bālakāṇḍa).
<div n="NI"/>5) {%In the company of Viśvāmitra.%} The four sons of
Daśaratha grew up in Ayodhyā. Though they were
equally friendly to one another, intimacy between Rāma
and Lakṣmaṇa and also between Bharata and Śatrughna
came to be thicker. Once Viśvāmitra decided to con-
duct a yajña for the happiness and contentment of all
people. At the very commencement of the yajña, Rākṣasas,
in batches, tried to spoil it, and Mārīca and Subāhu,
sons of Tāṭakā were the leaders of the obstructionists.
Viśvāmitra knew that Rāma was the most effective
weapon against the Rākṣasas and requested Daśaratha
to lend him Rāma's help. Daśaratha felt sad about it
and Viśvāmitra was getting excited over the former's
attitude when Vasiṣṭha advised Daśaratha to send Rāma
along with Viśvāmitra. Accordingly Daśaratha sent
Rāma to the forest in the company of Viśvāmitra.
Lakṣmaṇa too followed his brother.
<div n="NI"/>While walking in the forest Viśvāmitra related many
old stories to Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa. They crossed
river Sarayū, passed by many āśramas of munis and
reached the Pāla forest. Here Viśvāmitra imparted to
Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, who felt too weak on account
of hunger and thirst the two mantras Balā and Atibalā,
which would ward off hunger and thirst. He also
taught them the use of certain rare arrows. Śrī Rāma
was specially taught the use of a divine arrow called
Jṛmbhakāstra.
<div n="NI"/>6) {%Tāṭakā killed.%} While Viśvāmitra was relating to
them the story of Tāṭakā, who dwelt in the forest, they
saw the fierce Rākṣasī coming fast with a long spear in
her hand. She threw a big rock at Viśvāmitra. Rāma
shattered the rock with an arrow. Next, Tāṭakā dashed
forward against Rāma roaring furiously, and Rāma,
with another arrow killed her. The soul of the dead
Tāṭakā assumed the form of a Gandharva woman and
ascended to heaven.
<div n="NI"/>7) {%Salvation to Ahalyā.%} Rākṣasas like Subāhu lined up
to obstruct the yajña, which Viśvāmitra began after
the killing of Tāṭakā. Rāma killed Subāhu; Mārīca ran
away in fright and hid himself in the sea. Rāma drove
away the other Rākṣasas.
<div n="NI"/>Next, Viśvāmitra, hearing about the Svayaṃvara of
Sītā, daughter of King Janaka started for his palace with
Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, and on the way he told the boys
many Purāṇic stories. They bathed in the river Gaṅgā
and a short walk took them to the vacant āśrama of
Gautama. The great muni called Gautama had once
lived in this āśrama with his dutiful wife Ahalyā and
their son Śatānanda, an erudite scholar in all sciences.
Indra, who lost his head over the great beauty of Ahalyā
went to the āśrama one midnight in the form of a
cock and crew. Thinking it was already dawn Gautama
went to the river for bath when Indra assumed the
form of the muni, entered his bed room and slept with
Ahalyā. When Gautama understood the fraud thus
played upon him, he cursed her into a stone. She was
to resume her old form when, during Tretāyuga, Śrī
[Page632-b+ 65]
Rāma trod upon the stone. Accordingly, as soon as
Rāma trod on the stone Ahalyā cast off her form as stone
and resumed her old form as Ahalyā. Immediately
Gautama and Śatānanda also appeared on the scene.
Ahalyā ascended to the sky as a devī.
<div n="NI"/>8) {%Marriage.%} Vlśvāmitra came to king Janaka's palace
with Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa. Janaka's daughter Sītā and
his younger brothers' daughters Māṇḍavī, Ūrmilā and
Śrutakīrti were living in the palace as sisters and very
good friends. One day the princesses who were playing
in the garden could not pluck jasmine flowers from a
height. Sītā then brought the Śaivacāpa (Śiva's bow)
from the weapon-room and shot down Jasmine flowers
with it. As Janaka watched Sītā's action of shooting
with the Śaivacāpa an idea came into his head. He
announced that the hero, who succeeded in shoot-
ing with Śaivacāpa, would be given Sītā in marriage.
<div n="NI"/>Just as Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa were inseparable compan-
ions Sītā and Ūrmilā were always to be found together
and Māṇḍavī and Śrutakīrti were particular friends.
Śrī Rāma shot an arrow from Śiva's bow and he was
selected as Sītā's husband. Janaka informed Daśaratha
of the marriage and he came with his attendants.
Bharata married Māṇḍavī, Lakṣmaṇa, Ūrmilā and
Śatrughna, Śrutakīrti. After living in Mithilā for some-
time Daśaratha and others returned to Ayodhyā. Viśvā-
mitra went to the Himālayas for rest.
<div n="NI"/>9) {%Paraśurāma's threat.%} Daśaratha and others on their
way back to Ayodhyā passed the Videha kingdom and
reached the suburbs of Bhārgavāśrama. All of a sudden
a shining form of a brahmin with Kṣatriya effulgence
appeared in front of the procession. Vasiṣṭha under-
stood that it was Paraśurāma and Daśaratha and
others were alarmed. Paraśurāma approached Śrī Rāma
who was viewing the former with quiet serenity. Paraśu-
rāma was very angry that Rāma broke the bow of Śiva
who was his (Paraśurāma's) preceptor. All Rāma's con-
ciliatory talk failed to pacify Paraśurāma, who spoke
thus to Rāma: “You, impudent fellow! you insulted
me and my preceptor. All right, let me see your power.
Take this my bow, and shoot with it.”
<div n="NI"/>Śrī Rāma took hold of the bow and bent it easily and
fixing an arrow on it asked Paraśurāma to point out the
target for it. As Paraśurāma feared that if the arrow
was sent, it might crush the whole universe, he asked
Rāma so choose the result of his (Paraśurāma's) tapas
as target for the arrow. Both the bow and the arrow
were of Viṣṇu's power. That power as well as his own
Vaiṣṇava power, Paraśurāma transferred to Śrī Rāma
and having thus fulfilled the object of his incarnation
Paraśurāma went to Puṇyāśrama for permanent tapas.
<div n="NI"/>10) {%Ruin of the country.%} Daśaratha decided to install Śrī
Rāma as crown prince. The people whole-heartedly
welcomed it. During the night previous to the corona-
tion, while the wives of Daśaratha were gladly discussing
the happy incident, Mantharā, the tale-bearing maid of
Kaikeyī advised her mistress to prevail upon Daśaratha
to exile Rāma into the forest and install Bharata as
crown prince. Mantharā also reminded Kaikeyī about
the boons, which had been promised to her by Daśaratha
during the devāsura war. Kaikeyī fell into the trap
thus set by Mantharā. Kaikeyī put on a wrathful face and
shut herself up in a room. When Daśaratha enquired
of her the reason for her anger she asked him to make
her son Bharata, the crown prince and exile Rāma for
[Page633-a+ 65]
fourteen years' life in forest. The king fainted when
he heard the demand But, Śrī Rāma, on hearing about
it, put on an anchorite's apparel and got ready to start
for the forest. Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa also got ready to
follow Rāma into the forest. While the entire popula-
tion of Ayodhyā stood there weeping, Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa
and Sītā wearing the forest-dwellers' garb started for the
forest.
<div n="NI"/>11) {%Death of Daśaratha and Bharata's decision.%} As soon
as Sumantra, who had accompanied Rāma and others
returned to Ayodhyā, Daśaratha expired on account
of unbearable grief caused by Rāma's exile. Messengers
brought to Ayodhyā Bharata and Śatrughna from Kekaya
where they were put up with their uncle Yudhājit at
the time of their father's death. But, they were kept in
the dark of all that had happened in their absence till
their arrival at the palace. Bharata, who heard of every-
thing from his mother was greatly upset and got ready
to go to Rāma in the forest. Śatrughna too got ready
to accompany him. Arundhatī and Vasiṣṭha in a chariot
in the fore-front, Kausalyā and Sumitrā in another
chariot just behind the first one, Bharata and Śatrughna
behind them—in this manner the great journey into the
forest started. Leaving all others behind him, Bharata
went forward and prostrated before Rāma and Lakṣ-
maṇa at Citrakūṭa. Śrī Rāma broke into tears on hear-
ing about the death of their father. But in spite of
Bharata's pressing request Rāma refused to return to
Ayodhyā. At last Bharata yielded to Rāma's injunction
and returned to Ayodhyā with the latter's sandals. But
he did not enter the palace; instead he built an āśrama
at Nandigrāma and worshipping Rāma's sandals lived
there.
<div n="NI"/>12) {%Trip to Pañcavaṭī.%} From Mount Citrakūṭa Śrī
Rāma and others started towards the forest. When they
continued their journey after visiting the Sage Atri's
āśrama a Rākṣasa called Virādha ran away carrying
off Sītā. Rāma killed Virādha and regained Sītā. Then
they visited the āśrama of sage Śarabhaṅga in the
Kumuda forest. Therefrom they went to the Mṛkaṇḍu
forest where they visited maharṣi Agastya, and there
Rāma took the vow to kill Rāvaṇa and other evil Rā-
kṣasas and thus render the land safe for sages to perform
tapas. Agastya presented to Rāma a Vaiṣṇava bow, a
Brāhma arrow and a Śaiva quiver. Rāma kept them
with Agastya himself to be given to him when required.
Then Agastya gave Rāma a divine ornament such as
was not available in all the three worlds. Rāma tied it
round Sītā's neck. Taking leave of Agastya, Rāma and
others went to the Daṇḍaka forest. It was on a high peak
of Mount Mahākrauñca in the forest that Jaṭāyu,
brother of Sampāti and a very close friend of Rāma
lived. Rāma and Jaṭāyu renewed their old friendship and
decided to be of mutual service in future. After that
Rāma and others rested themselves on the banks of
the near-by Godāvarī.
<div n="NI"/>13) {%Stay at Pañcavaṭī.%} Pañcavaṭī was on the southern
bank of the Godāvarī. Five vaṭas (peepal trees) of the
same size stood there in a circle, and so the place was
called Pañcavaṭī. (See under Pañcavaṭī). Śrī Rāma de-
cided to build his āśrama at the centre of those trees.
Lakṣmaṇa cut down an ebony tree there to put up a
parṇaśālā (hut) At once the log disappeared and the
dead body of a Rākṣasa youth was found there. It was
the corpse of Śambhukumāra, son of Śūrpaṇakhā. He
[Page633-b+ 65]
was performing tapas there to propitiate Śiva when he
was overcome by the beauty of Sītā and to look at her
from a hidden spot he had assumed the form of the
ebony tree. It was him that Lakṣmaṇa had cut down.
Śrī Rāma understood the situation and explained to his
wife and brother about the trickeries of the Rākṣasas.
Then the parṇaśālā was constructed and they lived
there. Hearing about the coming of Rāma all the sages
of the Daṇḍaka forest visited them. They lived in
Pañcavaṭī for thirteen years.
<div n="NI"/>14) {%Test by Parameśvara (Śiva) and Pārvatī.%} Parameś-
vara and Pārvatī, who knew that many tricky changes
would occur in the thirteenth year of the life of Rāma
and Sītā there, decided to submit them to a test. The
object of the test was to see whether Rāma and Sītā
would recognise each other under all circumstances.
When Sītā one day entered the river Godāvarī to
fetch water, she saw two swans enjoying themselves in
a lotus pool in the middle of a sand-shoal in the river.
When Sītā went near the pool she saw Rāma bathing
in it. But on a closer look she recognised that it was
not Rāma, but Śiva, in the guise of Rāma, who was
bathing there. To befool Sītā Śiva, who was disguised
as Rāma, told her:—Dear one! Please come to me
quickly. Why were you so late?
<div n="NI"/>Sītā:—Oh, Deva! salutations. Why did you alone
come to the bath?
<div n="NI"/>Rāma:—I had to come alone as Devī did not come
with me at once and was late in coming.
<div n="NI"/>Sītā:—Why did not the Devī come? You two are
unique. Devī might be alone at Kailāsa just now. It
was not good that you did not bring her also with you.
<div n="NI"/>Śiva: Oh great Devī! salutations to your divine
greatness. Let me return to Kailāsa after saluting Śrī
Rāma. Hail unto thee.
<div n="NI"/>Meanwhile Śrī Rāma was waiting impatiently for Sītā to
return. Then Sītā approached him looking into a lotus
flower she held in her hand and also throwing, off and
on, amorous glances at him. (She was in fact Pārvatī
in the guise of Sītā). And she told Rāma:—My Lord!
you would excuse my delay in returning. The delay was
due to my tarrying there to look at the play of two swans.
Śrī Rāma looked closely and recognised that it was not
Sītā and replied as follows:—Oh Devī! my salutations.
Did you come alone? Where is Deva? How is it that
you are separated from him? Mahādeva and Mahādevī
are one and inseparable. Then how this separation?
Sītā (Pārvatī):—Salutations. Thou art omniscient and
omnipotent. I return to the presence of Śiva.
<div n="NI"/>15) {%The incident of Śūrpaṇakhā.%} Śūrpaṇakhā was the
wife of a Rākṣasa called Vidyujjihva. Once in a war
which Rāvaṇa, Vidyujjihva and other Rākṣasas fought
at Devaloka Vidyujjihva was killed by mistake. Rāvaṇa,
therefore, permitted Śūrpaṇakhā to choose whomsoever
she liked as her husband, and she went about the
world in search of a suitable husband. She liked some
persons, but they did not like her, and vice versa. Thus
she was roaming about discontented. She was also on
the look-out for an opportunity to take vengeance on
Lakṣmaṇa for killing her son, Śambhukumāra.
<div n="NI"/>Śūrpaṇakhā, who heard about the beauty of Rāma and
Lakṣmaṇa came to Pañcavaṭī disguised as Lalitā. Śrī
Rāma alone was there in the āśrama at the time and
she told him that she was love-sick. Śrī Rāma rejected
her prayer on the plea that he was already married.
[Page634-a+ 65]
Then she approached Lakṣmaṇa with the same request.
He too refused to oblige her. Then she saw Sītā there
and decided to shatter her married life and also to make
a present of her to Rāvaṇa. She also thought that if
Sītā were got rid of she would have Rāma for husband.
Maddened by such thoughts she rushed into the āśrama.
But, Lakṣmaṇa drove her out. Then, carrying
Lakṣmaṇa with her she rose into the sky and he cut away
both her ears, breasts and nose. Thus disfigured she
resumed her form of Rākṣasī. She flew away in the sky
roaring loudly.
<div n="NI"/>16) {%Khara killed.%} Having heard about the disfigure-
ment of Śūrpaṇakhā Khara sent fourteen Rākṣasas to
Rāma's āśrama. Lakṣmaṇa killed them very easily.
Next, Khara, his brothers Dūṣaṇa and Triśiras with
fourteen thousand Rākṣasa soldiers came to fight Rāma.
Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa killed them also. This saddened
Śūrpaṇakhā very much and she reported the entire
affair to Rāvaṇa at Laṅkā. She told him that Rāma and
Lakṣmaṇa were very courageous warriors and he was
not to enter into direct fighting with them, but was to
abduct Sītā whose loss would cause Rāma's death. She
also assured Rāvaṇa that if Rāma died, Lakṣmaṇa
would himself end his life.
<div n="NI"/>17) {%Sītā abducted.%} Next day a spotted deer was found
playing near the āśrama. Sītā desired to have the deer
and Śrī Rāma, after asking his brother to take care of
Sītā, followed the deer, which enticed him to a great
distance in the forest. At last, finding it difficult to
catch the deer alive, Rāma shot an arrow at it. Hit by
the arrow the deer transformed itself into a gigantic
Rākṣasa and fell down dead crying. “Oh! Sītā O!
Lakṣmaṇa, a Rākṣasa is killing me. Come and save
me.”
<div n="NI"/>The Rākṣasa, who thus fell a prey to Rāma's arrow was
really Mārīca, uncle of Rāvaṇa. Mārīca had
gone in the form of a deer to Rāma's āśrama at the
instance of his nephew to cheat Rāma. Sītā heard the
false cry of Mārīca and asked Lakṣmaṇa to hurry up
to the spot for Rāma's protection. Lakṣmaṇa at first
did not want to leave Sītā there alone and go after
Rāma. But, when she used hard and cruel words
against him Lakṣmaṇa quitted the āśrama and went
into the forest. When Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa were thus
absent at the āśrama an old Sannyāsin came for alms
at the courtyard. Sītā, who came out to offer alms
was forcibly carried away by Rāvaṇa (the sannyāsin
was Rāvaṇa in disguise) in his puṣpaka aerial chariot
to Laṅkā. On the way Jaṭāyu saw Rāvaṇa and put
up a fight with him to get Sītā released. But, Jaṭāyu
had to fall down wounded by the sword of Rāvaṇa and
he lay there awaiting Rāma's arrival.
<div n="NI"/>Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa returned to the āśrama only to
find Sītā missing. While they advanced some distance
lamenting over the loss of Sītā they saw Jaṭāyu lying
in the forest, his wings cut, but happy in expectation
of salvation and repeating the name of Rāma. Jaṭāyu
gave Rāma all details about Sītā and then gave up his
body and ascended to Vaikuṇṭha.
<div n="NI"/>18) {%Salvation to Kabandha.%} Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa moved
towards the south in quest of Sītā. An asura woman
called Ayomukhī, sister of Śūrapadma tried to entice
Lakṣmaṇa, who went alone to a pool to fetch water.
When Lakṣmaṇa resisted and kept away from her
allurements, she tried to carry him away into the sky.
[Page634-b+ 65]
But, he drove her away disfigured. When the brothers
continued their search for Sītā they were caught in the
arms stretched out in semi-circular form. It was a
Rākṣasa called Kabandha, and they cut away one arm
each. At once the fierce Kabandha (headless body)
form disappeared and a Gandharva youth appeared in
his place. After offering mokṣa to Kabandha Rāma
and Lakṣmaṇa continued their search for Sītā. (See
under Kabandha).
<div n="NI"/>19) {%Salvation to Śabarī.%} Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa reached
Śabaryāśrama and were duly received by the female
hermit Śabarī. She presented them with fruits. Not
only that, she personally tasted each fruit for its quality
and then gave the best to the guests. Rāma was so very
pleased with her pure devotion that he offered her
salvation. (For details see under Śabarī).
<div n="NI"/>20) {%Rāma-Sugriva alliance.%} Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa
bathed in the Pampā river and thus refreshed they
travelled upto the height of Mount Ṛṣyamūka where
Sugrīva lived with Hanūmān as his Prime Minister.
Sugrīva, who saw Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa coming, deputed
Hanūmān to find out whether they were friends or
foes. Hanūmān, in the guise of a brahmin boy talked
with them, who related their story from the abduction
of Sītā. Having understood the matters Hanūmān re-
sumed his actual form and carried Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa
on his shoulders into the presence of Sugrīva.
<div n="NI"/>Sugrīva related to Rāma the story of his expulsion
from Kiṣkindhā by Bāli, his elder brother. Sugrīva
wanted a powerful ally to recapture the country. Simi-
larly Śrī Rāma too wanted a powerful ally to regain
Sītā. So both the parties entered into an alliance,
Rāma undertaking to kill Bāli and restore his kingdom
and his wife to Sugrīva and Sugrīva undertaking to
search for and find out Sītā for Rāma.
<div n="NI"/>Though the above pact was made, Sugrīva was doubt-
ful about Rāma's capacity to honour his part of the
contract, and Rāma, knowing this suspicion of Sugrīva,
wanted to dispel it. The mountain-like body of Dun-
dubhi, the Rākṣasa killed by Bāli, lay there in a big
heap of bones and at the instance of Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa
threw it into the distant southern sea with the big toe
of his left foot. Sugrīva was wonder-struck at this feat
of Lakṣmaṇa and praised him. Yet Sugrīva was not
quite cured of his doubt and Rāma wanted to further
convince him of their prowess.
<div n="NI"/>There were seven big trees there known as Saptasālas.
Bāli used to wrestle with the trees due to his overflowing
vitality and power. (See under Saptasāla). Śrī Rāma
went near the trees and suddenly fixed an arrow on his
bow-string and shot it by drawing the bow, with the
big toe of his right foot pressed against a rock. The
arrow cut down the seven trees at one and the same
time and then automatically returned to its quiver.
Sugrīva was taken aback by this marvellous show of
power.
<div n="NI"/>21) {%Exhibition of ornaments.%} They came again to
Ṛṣyamūkācala and Sugrīva placed before Rāma a
bundle of ornaments and said that it was dropped down
by a weeping woman from an aerial chariot, which had,
a few days back, passed above the mountain. Rāma
recognised them as Sītā's ornaments, shed tears and sat
there motionless for some time. At last Sugrīva and
Lakṣmaṇa consoled him and he handed over the bundle
of ornaments to Lakṣmaṇa.
[Page635-a+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>22) {%Kingdom restored to Sugrīva.%} The very next day
Sugrīva took Rāma to Kiṣkindhā, and the former
challenged Bāli for a combat. Rāma, from a distance,
viewed the fierce fight between the brothers, but he
could not do anything as it was impossible to distinguish
between Bāli and Sugrīva on account of their very
close resemblance. Sugrīva, who was defeated in the
first round and retired from fight felt angry towards
Rāma, but was soon satisfied with Rāma's explanation
for his inaction. To distinguish Sugrīva from Bāli Śrī
Rama, the next day, put a garland on the former's neck
and wearing the garland Sugriva challenged Bāli a
second time to a duel. Though Bāli's wife, Tārā,
this time prevented him from accepting the challenge
Bāli paid no heed to her protests and rushed forth for
the duel.
<div n="NI"/>Bāli and Sugrīva fought again, and this time Rāma
from his concealment behind a tree shot an arrow at
the chest of Bāli. The arrow felled him. Rāma and
Lakṣmaṇa then came into the open and Bāli spoke
disparagingly to Rāma about shooting the arrow from
concealment. Rāma answered him saying that if he
had seen him (Rāma) face to face he would have
become his devotee and he had to shoot Bāli from his
hiding place as it was not proper to kill one's devotees.
At last, after handing over charge of his wife and son
Aṅgada, to Sugrīva, Bāli breathed his last. Śrī Rāma
decided to crown Sugrīva as King and install Aṅgada
as crown prince and returned to Ṛṣyamūkācala for
rest after entrusting, under the supervision of Lakṣmaṇa,
Hanūmān and Jāmbavān with the duty of making
preparations for the coronation. Though Sugrīva
invited Śrī Rāma to Kiṣkindhā when preparations for
coronation were over, the latter declined the invitation
gracefully and deputed Lakṣmaṇa to represent him at
the ceremony. Lakṣmaṇa installed Sugrīva as the
Mahārāja, Aṅgada as crown prince, Rumā as queen
and Tārā as queen-mother. Also, Hanūmān was
appointed as Sugrīva's minister. Those things over,
Lakṣmaṇa returned to Rāma at Ṛṣyamūkācala.
<div n="NI"/>23) {%Lakṣmaṇa's wrath.%} The next four months were
rainy period. Even after that Sugrīva did not make
necessary arrangements to search for Sītā. At Rāma's
instance Lakṣmaṇa went to Kiṣkindhā to enquire about
the reason for the delay. The monkeys were alarmed
by the grave appearance of Lakṣmaṇa and Tārā came
out and apologised to him. Arrangements were soon
finalised for the quest of Sītā. Armies of many lakhs
of monkeys were deputed to the eight regions to search
for Sītā. Suṣeṇa was appointed chief of the army for
the west, Śatabali for the north, Vinata for the east and
Aṅgada for the south. As the south was the chief
place for the search, monkeys like Hanūmān, Jāmbavān,
Vivida, Nala, Nila, Kumuda, each of them an expert
in various ways, were appointed chiefs of different
matters. Every chief and his assistant was given
suitable instructions by Lakṣmaṇa and Sugrīva, and
accordingly the army of monkeys began its march
under the leadership of Hanūmān.
<div n="NI"/>24) {%Words of recognition.%} To convince Sītā that it was
really the emissary of Rāma who went to her the latter
imparted to Hanūmān the following three sentences for
timely use.
<div n="NI"/>(i) “When I took leave of you for life in exile in the
forest you (Sītā) who were then in the inner apartment
[Page635-b+ 65]
dressed in ordinary fashion came out in the same dress
prepared to follow me saying ‘I too...’ feigning anger’.
<div n="NI"/>(ii) When, for out life in the forest, we had left the
city and approached a shrubbery, Śītā in her childish
ignorance and goodness of heart told me “This place
will do for our forest life.”
<div n="NI"/>(iii) While she was one day massaging my leg in our
bedroom she threw away from her finger the ring
studded with stones. When I asked her the reason for
it she answered me as follows:—This ring studded with
stones may prove to be of danger to me. When your
feet touched the hard granite rock it turned out into a
world beauty (Ahalyā). Under the circumstances how
much more beautiful would be the woman, who would
be created by the touch of your foot on the beautiful
stone of the ring? And, because of that beauty you
may...me...and then...”. We two—I and Sītā—alone
knew about the above incident.
<div n="NI"/>Carrying thus Śrī Rāma's signet ring and words of re-
cognition Hanūmān went along with the army, which
started for the south. Sugrīva gave one month's time
to the searching parties to find out Sītā and warned
them that their throats would be cut if they failed in
their mission.
<div n="NI"/>25) {%Saw Svayamprabhā.%} Aṅgada, Hanūmān, Jāmbavān
and others during their search came to an extensive
forest. They were dead tired with hunger and thirst.
The leader of the party looked about for something to
eat and drink when he saw small birds flying up from
a distant pit. From drops of water falling from the
wings of the birds it was inferred that the pit contained
water. When Hanūmān and others entered the pit
(cave) and walked a great distance they came to a
spacious garden. They were astonished to find a solitary
beauty there, and she related to them her autobiography
as follows:—
<div n="NI"/>I am the faithful maid of Rambhā. The powerful asura
called Caturāsya wanted me to procure Rambhā for
him and he got this garden city built by Mayācārya,
the architect of the Daityas, for me as reward for my
service to him in the matter of Rambhā. Various kinds
of gems light this place and creepers and trees supply
food materials. Catuārsya, I and Rambhā alone were
living here. But, Indra came to know of it, came here,
killed Caturāsya and took away Rambhā with him.
He cursed me to lead a solitary life here as punish-
ment for having helped Caturāsya. I prayed for redemp-
tion from the curse and Indra told me, that after
thousands of years a company of monkeys would come
here in search of Sītā and that after entertaining them
with food I must see Rāma and then return to Svarga.
I have thus been awaiting your arrival and now I am
leaving the place, which will vanish as soon as I quit
it. All of you, please stand there with eyes closed and
I shall send you back to the place where you were
before coming here.
<div n="NI"/>Accordingly the monkeys stood there with eyes closed
and when they opened their eyes there was neither the
garden city nor Svayamprabhā there but they were
standing in the old plain. Svayamprabhā appeared
before Rāma, praised him and then went to Svarga.
<div n="NI"/>26) {%Met Sampāti.%} The monkeys again went southward,
reached Mahendragiri and descending on its southern
side came to the shores of the southern sea. They could
advance no further to the south. They were suffering
[Page636-a+ 65]
from great hunger and thirst and if they returned with
no tangible information about Sītā, Sugrīva would kill
them. They preferred death by fasting on the seashore
to death by the sword of Sugrīva.
<div n="NI"/>Having decided thus the monkeys spread darbha grass
on the extensive plain of Mahendra mountain and lay
on the grass to die. In a large cave in the mountain
was living Sampāti. The huge bird Sampāti was star-
ving without food and was not able to fly as it had lost
its wings. But it dragged itself to the mouth of the cave
and saw the monkeys lying there awaiting death, and
it thought of eating the monkeys one by one. The
monkeys, who understood this idea of Sampāti cursed
their fate and sang the praise of Jaṭāyu.
<div n="NI"/>Hearing the word ‘Jaṭāyu’ Sampāti approached the
monkeys, who related to him the object of their journey.
Being told about the death of Jaṭāyu. Sampāti
shed tears and told the monkeys as follows:-
<div n="NI"/>Jaṭāyu was my younger brother. Our mother was Mahā-
śvetā and father Sūryadeva. On account of the boon of
our parents I was King of all the birds and Jaṭāyu the
crown Prince. As our brotherliness grew thicker our
haughtiness due to our power and speed also increased.
Once we flew up towards the orbit of the Sun to see him,
our father. In his youthful enthusiasm my younger
brother, Jaṭāyu, climbed higher up in the sky leaving
me behind. Due to the heat of the Sun his wings lost
their power and energy. Then, to save him, I flew up
above him and shaded him. Therefore he could descend
to the earth without his wings being burned and thus
killed. But, my wings got burned and I fell down on
the Mahendra mountain and got my legs broken. Thus
I lost the power either to fly or to walk.
<div n="NI"/>I stayed here as the attendant of Niśākara Maharṣi,
who could divine the future also. He told me the story
about Rāma's incarnation. He told me further that
monkeys in search of Sītā would come here when I
should tell them where Sītā was and that then I would
regain my health.”
<div n="NI"/>After telling the monkeys the above facts Sampāti, with
their cooperation, performed the obsequies of Jaṭāyu.
Then the King of birds (Sampāti) raised its head and
surveyed the ocean and he saw the following: Mountain
Subela in the heart of the southern sea; the plain at
the heights of the mountain constituting the base of
Laṅkā; in the centre of Laṅkā there was Rāvaṇa's
capital; nearby the ladies' quarters; near the quarters
the aśoka garden; at the centre of the garden the
śiṃśapā tree and under the tree Sītādevī.
<div n="NI"/>As soon as Sampāti had finished telling the monkeys
the above details he regained his health.
<div n="NI"/>Sampāti told the monkeys another story also as follows:-
Rāvaṇa once abducted a Yakṣa beauty from Alakāpurī
and carried her away in his Puṣpaka Vimāna.
Sampāti clashed with Rāvaṇa on his way and destroyed
his plane. But the plane, which was self-generating
came again into existence. Sampāti threw away by
its beak the Candrahāsa (Rāvaṇa's sword) and kicked
his crown down. At last, at the request of Rāvaṇa, he
and Sampāti signed a non-aggression pact. That was
the reason why Sampāti could not fight Rāvaṇa in
person.
<div n="NI"/>27) {%Hanūmān saw Sītā.%} Aṅgada said that for the search
for Sītā in Laṅkā as told by Sampāti, some one should
jump across the ocean. Though many a monkey tried to
[Page636-b+ 65]
do so it was Hanūmān, who succeeded in crossing the sea.
At one jump he reached the heights of Mahendragiri
whence he took another jump forward. But, midway
Surasā, mother of the nāgas, swallowed him, and he
came out through her ear and continued his journey
towards Laṅkā. When he had advanced some more
distance an evil spirit called Chāyāgrāhiṇī obstructed
his way by a mysterious attack on his shadow.
Hanūmān quickly understood what had happened and
killed the evil spirit with one kick of his left foot. He
again continued his flight. But, he very soon became
weak and exhausted. Then Mount Maināka emerged
from the ocean and fed Hanūmān with fruits and roots.
He reached Laṅkā at dusk. He defeated Laṅkālakṣmī,
who tried to prevent his entry into the city. In fact
Laṅkālakṣmī was Vijayalakṣmī, who had been cursed
by Brahmā. (For details see under Vijayalakṣmī).
After defeating her, who was thus absolved from the
curse, Hanūmān saw Sītā seated under the aśoka tree.
But, none saw him as he was perched on a tree.
<div n="NI"/>28) {%Hanūmān's return.%} That night Rāvaṇa dressed in
all splendour visited Sītā and tried to secure her favour
by soft words and cajolery, all to no purpose. Then he
threatened her with punishments, which too proved
to be of no avail. After instructing the Rākṣasa
women that Sītā should be somehow brought round
within a month's time, Rāvaṇa returned to his palace.
<div n="NI"/>Rākṣasīs surrounded Sītā and described to her the
greatness and various merits of Rāvaṇa. Sītā continued
to sob. Then came there Trijaṭā, daughter of
Vibhīṣaṇa, the great devotee of Viṣṇu, and Saramā,
to console Sītā. Trijaṭā had boundless devotion to-
wards Rāma and great love for Sītā. She repeated
to Sītā certain dreams she had had.
<div n="NI"/>Left to herself Sītā began saying to herself various
things regarding her past. She referred to her infancy,
beginning of youth, wedding, stay at Ayodhyā, forest-
life and life in Pañcavaṭī and wept over her recurring
thoughts about them. Hanūmān, who heard Sītā's
soliloquy completed Sītā's story by relating, from his
place on the tree, about Jaṭāyu's salvation, salvation
given to Kabandha and Śabarī, alliance with Sugrīva,
killing of Bāli, expedition of the monkeys in search of
Sītā, meeting with Sampāti, himself (Hanūmān) cross-
ing the sea and his finding out Sītā. Hearing the words
of Hanūmān, Sītā looked up in astonishment. Immedia-
tely Hanūmān came down the tree and presented the
signet ring at Sītā's feet. When she examined the ring
her hands shook and tears dimmed her eyes. Hanūmān
talked to her in detail and told her that he would, if
only Sītā permitted him, carry her on his shoulders to
Rāma. He told her further that if she did not welcome
the idea of thus returning to Rāma, he would return
with Śrī Rāma and others, defeat Rāvaṇa in war and
take her back. Sītā was not convinced about the power
and prowess of Hanūmān. He then increased his body
in size so that his limbs grew into the size of a mountain,
hands into that of trees, head into that of a mountain
peak, tail into that of a river etc. His breathing became
akin to a storm. Then he roared in such a manner that
even the very ends of the world shook and the people
of Laṅkā were awakened by it.
<div n="NI"/>Sītā was now absolutely convinced of Hanūmān's bona
fides and faithfulness. She handed over to him
her Cūḍāmaṇi (ornament worn on the head) to be
[Page637-a+ 65]
given to Rāma and also told him the following three
words of recognition so that Rāma might be all the
more convinced.
<div n="NI"/>(1) When Rāma first came to the garden near the
palace in Mithilā I (Sītā) saw his reflection in the
blue mirror in the veranda of my palace and the
beauty of the reflection attracted me. I looked towards
the garden to see the original of the reflection. Then he
(Rāma) was looking down into the waters of the glass
pond. He also saw my face reflected in the water and
suddenly he looked at me. Our eyes met and in all
shyness I hurried to and hid myself in the ladies'
quarters.
<div n="NI"/>(2) Before our wedding I sent him through a faithful
maid, a love letter to which he gave me a suitable
reply.
<div n="NI"/>(3) After our wedding while we were living in Ayodhyā
when one day I returned to our bedroom after a long
chitchat with my younger sisters, my lord (Rāma) was
lying on the cot in feigned sleep. Quietly I went up
to him and kissed him on the lips. Because of the
pressure on his lips and as my breast then touched his
chest he pretended to have suddenly woken up and
embraced me.
<div n="NI"/>Having received thus from Sītā the Cūḍāmaṇi and
these words of recognition Hanūmān took leave of Sītā
and with her implied sanction went about to have a
look at Laṅkā. At one place he heard Vibhīṣaṇa
reciting Viṣṇu's names. After wishing that this house
of the devotee should turn into a royal abode he passed
Vibhīṣaṇa's house. Then he came to Rāvaṇa's palace
and gathered information about the Rākṣasa power.
“Now I must see Rāvaṇa in person, let him know
personally the fact of my visit and I would give him
righteous advice”—with this object in view Hanūmān
began destroying the garden. He drove away the
Rākṣasas, who came to punish him and some of them
were killed. At last Meghanāda (Indrajit) attacked
Hanūmān. Hiding in the sky he shot the Brahmāstra
against Hanūmān, who yielded to it. The Rākṣasas
took Hanūmān captive to Rāvaṇa. He freed himself of
the cords that bound him, extended his tail which he
shaped into circles, one over the other so that the last
one rose more in height than Rāvaṇa's throne and
seated himself on its top. Rāvaṇa and Hanūmān then
began a conversation. Rāvaṇa, who got angry at the
disrespect shown to him by Hanūmān, ordered the
latter to be killed, but Vibhīṣaṇa opposed it saying that
to kill emissaries and messengers was worse than killing
one's own mother. Finally Rāvaṇa ordered that
Hanūmān's tail be set fire to and he be insulted and
humiliated.
<div n="NI"/>Immediately Rākṣasas began to cover Hanūmān's tail
with clothes. But, ths tail began growing longer and
longer with the result that no quantity of clothings
sufficed to completely cover the ever-extending tail.
At last the Rākṣasas poured oil over the tail and set
fire to it. Then Hanūmān broke loose from captivity
and jumped up into the air causing universal disaster by
fire in Laṅkā. The fire did not affect the palace of
Vibhīṣaṇa and also the platform around the Śiṃśapā
tree where Sītā sat. After thus burning down Laṅkā
Hanūmān extinguished the fire on his tail by dipping it
in the ocean. Taking leave once again of Sītā,
Hanūmān crossed the sea and reached Mahendragiri.
[Page637-b+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>29) {%Rāma-Rāvaṇa war.%} Śrī Rāma and Sugrīva, who
received Hanūmān's report about his visit to Laṅkā
started for it with an army of monkeys. They camped
on the shores of the south sea. Rāvaṇa held a meeting
of his war council attended by his brothers and others.
He expelled Vibhīṣaṇa, who opposed war and advised
his brother to return Sītā to Rāma and to apologise to
him. Vibhīṣaṇa quitted Laṅkā and took refuge with
Rāma.
<div n="NI"/>Rāma and others, who had assembled on the sea-shore
decided to build a bund to Laṅkā. The first thing Rāma
did, for the successful conclusion of the expedition, was
to install a Śivaliṅga at Rāmeśvara. (See under Rāmeś-
vara). Then he prayed to Varuṇadeva for a passage
across the sea. But, Varuṇa did not present himself
and Śrī Rāma, angry with him, shot the āgneya
(fiery) arrow into the heart of the sea when Varuṇa
appeared, saluted him and advised him to build a
bund across the sea. As a reward for Varuṇa Śrī Rāma,
as requested by the former, killed with one arrow all
the Rākṣasas, who lived in Gāndhāra island on the
north-western shore of the ocean. Varuṇa returned to
his abode. The construction of the bund was begun
under the leadership of Sugrīva with Nala as chief
planner and Nīla as his co-planner. Jāmbavān and
Hanūmān functioned as supervisors and other monkeys
as workers. Mountains, hills, rocks etc. were brought from
various quarters and the construction of the bund was
begun.
<div n="NI"/>Meanwhile, Rāvaṇa sent a great magician called
Marutta disguised as King Janaka to Sītā to convert
her to the side of Rāvaṇa. But, the attempt failed.
Rāvaṇa then sent his two expert spies, Śuka and
Sāraṇa disguised as monkeys to Rāma's camp. Jāmba-
vān and Hanūmān captured and brought them before
Sugrīva. Weepingly they both sought refuge in Rāma,
who set them free. They returned to Laṅkā and
reported matters to Rāvaṇa, who felt a desire to have
a look at Rāma for which purpose he, with his attend-
ants, climbed to the top of the northern tower. Rāma,
who knew about it by his spies climbed the heights of
Subela mountain whence he stared at Rāvaṇa. Their
eyes met in anger seeing which Sugrīva by one leap
reached Rāvaṇa and kicked off to Rāma the crown
from the central head of Rāvaṇa. After performing
something like a destructive dance on Rāvaṇa's head
Sugrīva by another leap returned to Rāma.
<div n="NI"/>Full of disappointment Rāvaṇa returned to his palace.
His father-in-law, Mālyavān, tried his best to dissuade
Rāvaṇa from war, all to no purpose. Rāma sent an
emissary to him to ask him to send Sītā back. Rāvaṇa
declined to oblige, and immediately war began. During
the first day of the war, the majority of the Rākṣasas
including their great leaders like Mahābāhu, Mahā-
pārśva, Mahodara, Mahākāya etc were killed. On the
second day the Rākṣasa army under the command of
Atikāya, son of Rāvaṇa, set out from the northern
tower to fight. Lakṣmaṇa killed Atikāya with Brahmā-
stra. The other two Rākṣasa-commanders were
Triśiras and Meghanāda. Lakṣmaṇa encountered them.
When the latter failed to win by righteous fighting he
resorted to cunningness. That too did not bring victory
to him, and then he hid himself in the sky and shot
the nāgāstra given to him by Śiva against the enemy.
That arrow rendered Lakṣmaṇa, Sugrīva and all the
[Page638-a+ 65]
monkeys unconscious. At that time Vibhīṣaṇa was away
to arrange for food.
<div n="NI"/>When Vibhīṣaṇa returned with food he was taken
aback to find Lakṣmaṇa and others lying in an uncons-
cious condition. Rāma was informed about the matter
and when he came to the battle-ground and saw
Lakṣmaṇa, Sugrīva, Hanūmān and all the others lying
there unconscious he lost self-confidence for a short
while and remarked that it was all the result of his
having put faith in Vibhīṣaṇa, Rāvaṇa's brother whom
he had put in charge of the battlefield. This comment
of Rāma pained Vibhīṣaṇa much; but Śrī Rāma soon
treated him kindly.
<div n="NI"/>Even the Devas who witnessed the scene were alarmed.
But Rāma sat there for sometime immersed in medi-
tation and then a light emerged from his right eye,
shot towards the north and disappeared in the horizon.
At once Garuḍa appeared on the scene from the west
and removed with his beak the nāgāstra from
Lakṣmaṇa's body. Lakṣmaṇa jumped up from his
unconscious state; Sugrīva and others also regained
consciousness. In the fighting that followed all the
Rākṣasa leaders were killed. It was Hanūmān, who
killed Kumbhakarṇa. At the time of his death
Kumbhakarṇa made a last request to Rāma, i. e. his head
should be cut off and thrown into the sea as otherwise
the Rākṣasas would laugh at him to see the head from
which the ears have been bitten off by monkeys.
Accordingly Rāma got Hanūmān to throw Kumbha-
karṇa's head into the sea.
<div n="NI"/>Then Śrī Rāma told Lakṣmaṇa thus: Today I shall
fight Indrajit. The war shall not continue yet further.
Today Indrajit and tomorrow Rāvaṇa should be killed
and the next day we will return to Ayodhyā. Lakṣmaṇa
answered:—“I shall fight Indrajit. I have told Vibhīṣaṇa
that I will kill Indrajit within three days.”
<div n="NI"/>With Śrī Rāma's blessings Lakṣmaṇa began fighting
again. Indrajit shot Nārāyaṇāstra which attracted by
the ‘seven-letter-Mantra’ (Namo Nārāyaṇāya) of
Lakṣmaṇa circled him thrice and entered his quiver.
The Rākṣasa minister called Mahodara converted his
elephant into Airāvata and himself changed into
Devendra and encountered Lakṣmaṇa. Saying that he
had no quarrel with Indra and would not fight him
Lakṣmaṇa put down his bow, and Indrajit, exploiting
the situation shot Brahmāstra against Lakṣmaṇa under
cover of the clouds. Lakṣmaṇa, Sugrīva and others
fainted. Then Śrī Rāma was in the army-camp,
worshipping weapons to render them more powerful.
Rāma returned to the battle-ground to find Lakṣmaṇa
and others in life-less condition and crying like a mere
ignorant fellow he lay by the side of Lakṣmaṇa.
Vibhīṣaṇa, who returned with food prayed for the grace
of Devas. Indra appeared, gave to Vibhīṣaṇa Gaṅgā
water in a golden vessel and asked it to be given to
Hanūmān and Jāmbavān, who, though unconscious
were not dead.
<div n="NI"/>Vibhīṣaṇa did so and both Hanūmān and Jāmbavān
regained consciousness. Jāmbavān told Hanūmān that
if mṛtasañjīvinī (herbal medicine which will put life
back into the dead) were brought from the distant
Himālayas before dawn the next day all the dead ones
like Lakṣmaṇa and Sugrīva could be brought back to
life. (See under Mṛtasañjīvinī). Accordingly Hanūmān
started for the Himālayas. Meanwhile Indrajit had
[Page638-b+ 64]
told Rāvaṇa about his victory, and as suggested by the
latter Rākṣasa women took Sītā to the battlefield in the
Puṣpaka Vimāna, showed her Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa and
others lying there in a life-less condition and told her
that all of them were dead. Sītā wept aloud, but Trijaṭā
consoled her by saying that the Puṣpaka Vimāna would
not carry widows and therefore Rāma was not dead.
<div n="NI"/>Hanūmān returned before dawn the next day. As he
could not distinguish mṛtasañjīvinī he had brought
with him a mountain peak where the four medicinal
plants, Śalyaharaṇī, Viśalyakaraṇī, Sandhānakaraṇī
and Mṛtasañjīvinī grew. Jāmbavān distinguished
mṛtasañjīvinī from the others and carried the four
herbs into the battlefield. Contact with the air, which
carried the smell of mṛtasañjīvinī brought the dead back
to life. Viśalyakaraṇī removed all the arrows from their
bodies and Sandhānakaraṇī healed the wounds.
<div n="NI"/>Lakṣmaṇa again went out to fight Indrajit. Reluctant
to fight with the former, Indrajit resorted to a new
magical trick. He created an artificial or illusory
Sītā and with her seated in a chariot he rose up in the
sky and said as follows: “Rāvaṇa has abandoned Sītā
who brings about humiliation to the Rākṣasas and
ruin to Laṅkā. So, I cut her to pieces.” So saying he
cut into two, by one stroke of his sword, Sītā, who
cried Oh! my lord! oh! brother.” Blood fell on the
battlefield and Indrajit disappeared. Though Rāma
and others were alarmed by all these, Vibhīṣaṇa explain-
ed that it was all the magic of the Rākṣasas, and in the
fierce fighting that followed Lakṣmaṇa killed Indrajit.
By now all the important and prominent Rākṣasas
were killed. At last Rāvaṇa himself entered the battle-
field. His first encounter was with Lakṣmaṇa. Then
the fighting turned into one between Rāma and
Rāvaṇa. The former broke the bow of Rāvaṇa and did
not want to fight with the weaponless Rākṣasa King.
Next day Rāvaṇa brought Pātāla Rāvaṇa and
Kumbhodara to Laṅkā. Both of them entered Rāma's
camp during night, but Pātāla Rāvaṇa, who realised
that nothing could be achieved there returned to
Pātāla with Kumbhodara. He built a tunnel from
Pātāla upwards to earth, where in the fort created by
Hanūmān's tail twisted in a circle lay Śrī Rāma and
others. The tunnel opened into this ‘fort’, and Pātāla
Rāvaṇa and his brother made Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa
unconscious by making them inhale sammohana
medicine and carried them off into Pātāla. Rāma and
Lakṣmaṇa were laid in the court-yard of a Kālī temple
to be sacrificed to Mahākālī the very same night.
Arrangements for the sacrifice were completed.
<div n="NI"/>Hanūmān had been frequently looking inside the fort.
As soon as the absence of Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa was
noticed, Sugrīva and others, under the leadership of
Vibhīṣaṇa reached the Kālī temple through the tunnel.
In the fighting that followed Hanūmān killed Pātāla
Rāvaṇa and Aṅgada killed Mahodara. The only son
of Pātāla Rāvaṇa, Sumālī, was crowned King of Pātāla.
Rāvaṇa entered the field again against Rāma. Rāma
shot the Mahendra arrow against Rāvaṇa. The arrow,
which represented in itself the effulgence of Mahendra,
the hardness of diamonds, the intensity of fire and
Viṣṇu's glow cut off the ten heads of Rāvaṇa. His
physical body fell on earth and his spirit ascended to
heaven.
[Page639-a+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>30). {%Return.%} Rāma and others, who were pleased with
the turn of events, crowned Vibhīṣaṇa King of Laṅkā.
Trijaṭā was put in charge of dressing Sītā in new
clothes. Apsarās appeared on the scene. Śacīdevī
presented to Sītā a chain, Urvaśī an ornament for
the head, Menakā, two bangles, Rambhā a waist-let,
Tilottamā a set of chains for the feet, and Anasūyā, wife
of Atri, a Cūḍāmaṇi. When she wore all these orna-
ments Sītā appeared to be equal to Lakṣmīdevī in
grandeur and charm. She was brought in a palanquin
to Śrī Rāma by Vibhīṣaṇa and others. Rāma was taken
aback by the glamorous dress, ornaments etc. of Śītā,
and immediately a suspicion arose in his mind, and he
kept mum after asking Lakṣmaṇa to do whatever Sītā
wanted. As soon as she heard those words of Rāma,
Sītā asked Lakṣmaṇa to light a funeral pyre saying that
the woman suspected by her husband should not live
and so she (Sītā) would quit her life in the very
presence of Rāma.
<div n="NI"/>Lakṣmaṇa cast a pathetic look at Rāma; but his face
exhibited no change of feeling. He granted Sītā's re-
quest by his silence. Those present there awaited develop-
ments with bated breath. Lakṣmaṇa, with the help
of the monkeys got a pyre ready. After going round
Rāma with folded hands Sītā leapt into the glowing fire.
Within a very short time three divine forms emerged
from the fire, Svāhādevī, Sītādevī and God Agni.
<div n="NI"/>His suspicions having thus vanished Rāma welcomed
Sītā back and the next day they left for Ayodhyā in the
Puṣpaka Vimāna. Vibhīṣaṇa, Sugrīva, Hanūmān and
others followed them. After reaching Ayodhyā Rāma
returned the Puṣpaka to Kubera. Bharata came back
from Nandigrāma. In the presence of all relations
and others concerned the coronation of Rāma as king
took place. Bharata was appointed crown Prince, Lakṣ-
maṇa Commander-in-chief of armies and Śatrughna,
Finance minister.
<div n="NI"/>31) {%Sītā abandoned.%} Under Rāma's rule the country
overflowed with milk and honey. Nobody had to fear
anything from enemies. He made Sītā kill Sahasramukha
Rāvaṇa. (For details see under Sahasramukharāvaṇa).
<div n="NI"/>Śrī Rāma used to go about the country in disguise to
enquire about the welfare of his subjects. On a particular
dawn he happened to be standing outside the house of
a washerman. The washerman scolded his wife, who
had gone out of the house that night for something.
He suspected that she had gone to meet her paramour.
He bluntly told his wife that he was not prepared to
act like Rāma, who had accepted Sītā, though she had
lived with another person. Śrī Rāma, who heard the
above talk, returned to his palace very sad. After
thinking about for a long time he decided that it was
his duty to abandon Sītā in the interests of his subjects.
Then Sītā was in the seventh month of her pregnancy. She
had on the previous day, expressed a desire to go to the
forest areas once again. Rāma considered this as the
most suitable opportunity to abandon Sītā in the forest
and Lakṣmaṇa was entrusted with the matter. That
day at Sun-rise Lakṣmaṇa took Sītā in a chariot to the
suburbs of Vālmīki's āśrama, abandoned her there and
returned to the palace. (According to the Rāmāyaṇa
written by Kamba, a Tamil author, it is said that Sītā
was left in the suburbs of Gautama's hut. There, Sītā
who was pregnant was looked after by Ahalyā, the wife
of Gautama.) Weeping aloud Sītā fell down. Young
[Page639-b+ 65]
munis—Vālmīki's disciples—saw her and took her to
the āśrama. At the āśrama she delivered two sons, Kuśa
and Lava.
<div n="NI"/>32) {%Aśvamedha.%} After abandoning Sītā in the forests
Rāma led a sad life for five years. Yet, he decided to
perform an Aśvamedha yajña. As soon as Rāma thought
of him, Hanūmān appeared and he was deputed to in-
vite Vibhīṣaṇa, Sugrīva and others from Laṅkā and
Kiṣkindhā and the feudatory princes and armies from
other countries.
<div n="NI"/>Sugrīva was put in charge of the armies, Vibhīṣaṇa in
charge of finance, and central authority was vested in
Lakṣmaṇa. Then the yājñic horse, accompanied
by the army, was let loose to travel all over the
country. Accompanied by cavalry, the elephant division,
infantry and the chariot-force the horse went about the
various kingdoms. The army, on its way back to Ayodhyā
with presents collected from many kingdoms, encamped
for rest near Vālmīki's āśrama when Kuśa and Lava
tied the yājñic horse, which was strolling there unfetter-
ed. Consequent upon this action of Kuśa and Lava a fight
broke out between them and the king's army in which
the latter got defeated. Even the arrows of Lakṣmaṇa
failed to have any effect on the boys. The boys having
not returned even though it had become very late in
the evening, the āśramites went in search of them and
it was only when they came to the scene of fighting did
Lakṣmaṇa and others know who the boys really were.
<div n="NI"/>During this period of time infants' death was very much
on the increase in Ayodhyā. It was believed that such
deaths increased when Śūdras did tapas, and to find out
if any Śūdra was engaged in tapas Rāma flew over the
Daṇḍaka forest where he found a Śūdra called Śambūka
performing tapas hanging down from the branch of a
tree with his head down. Rāma killed him and his
spirit got salvation. Afterwards, appreciating the beauties
of the forest Rāma came near Vālmīki's āśrama where
he and Sītā met face to face. Kuśa and Lava also came
there and they noticed with surprise the change in
appearance brought about in their mother and Rāma
on their meeting each other. When they heard from
Hanūmān the real facts about Rāma they withdrew
their arrows and prostrated at the feet of Rāma.
<div n="NI"/>Śrī Rāma then, with the consent of all and in accord-
ance with his own desire, took back Sītā and returned
with her to Ayodhyā. Lakṣmaṇa and others followed him.
Kausalyā and others received Sītā most heartily. Śrī
Rāma, who till then was having no wife, had made
a golden image of Sītā for the purposes of the a va-
medha. Now, since the real Sītā was with him the idol
was an unnecessary thing. The Aśvamedhayajña went
off very well.
<div n="NI"/>33) {%The end.%} Śrī Rāma's reign became all the more
prosperous. It was during this period that Rāma, as
desired by the munis in the Yamunā plain, killed
Lavaṇāsura, son of Madhu in the great city called
Durga in the centre of the Madhu forest. (For details
see under Lavaṇa). After Lavaṇa's death, a sect of
Gandharvas called Śailūṣas, who lived on the shores
of the eastern sea, proved to be enemies of Ayodhyā.
Śrī Rāma annihilated them also. Kaikeyī began getting
jealous of the prosperity and happiness of Sītā. One
day when Rāma had gone to hunt in the forest, Kaikeyī
closely questioned Sītā over particulars in Laṅkā and
prevailed upon her, overruling her unwillingness, to
[Page640-a+ 63]
draw a picture of Rāvaṇa. Sītā drew on a piece of
‘sitting-plank’ Rāvaṇa's figure with the ten heads.
Kaikeyī took away the picture on the pretext of exhi-
biting it in the ladies' quarters, and gave it to Rāma,
when he returned from hunting, to sit on at the time
of Pūjā (worship). Rāma got angry to find Rāvaṇa's
picture drawn on the ‘sitting plank’. Kaikeyī then told
him that it was Sītā, who had drawn the picture and
also that she usually praised Laṅkā and Rāvaṇa. Rāma
pronounced the death penalty on Sītā for having drawn
Rāvaṇa's picture. The inmates of the palace
shuddered to hear the judgement. When Lakṣmaṇa
seated Sītā on the floor to kill her, Bhūmidevī (earth)
rent itself open into two and carried her off through the
opening.
<div n="NI"/>Śrī Rāma grew sadder and sadder following the dis-
appearance of Sītā. Ill omens began to appear in
Ayodhyā in increasing measure. One day a divine Ṛṣi
whom the people of Ayodhyā had not seen till then,
came to Rāma's palace. He told Rāma that he had to
impart certain secrets to the latter and after making
Rāma vow that no one would enter the room while
they were conversing and that if any one did come
when they were talking, he should either be killed or
forsaken for ever, he began to talk with Rāma in a
secluded spot. Rāma posted Lakṣmaṇa at the entrance
with the strict injunctions that nobody should come
into their presence. Within a short time great munis
like Sanaka came there and told Lakṣmaṇa that they
wanted to see Rāma. They were not prepared to wait
even for a short time as requested by Lakṣmaṇa, but
threatened ruin to the royal family. Lakṣmaṇa then,
was prepared to suffer the consequence, and went to
Rāma and told him about the arrival of Sanaka and
others. Rāma, in keeping with his vow, banished
Lakṣmaṇa immediately. But, when Rāma came out and
looked for Sanaka and others no one was to be found
anywhere there. When he returned to the inner apart-
ment the Ṛṣi also was not to be seen. In fact they were
Kāla and his emissaries deputed by Brahmā to recall
Rāma as the object of his incarnation was already
achieved.
<div n="NI"/>Rāma, who had already been suffering mental agony
on account of Sītā's departure, lost all peace of mind
as Lakṣmaṇa's banishment followed Sītā's departure.
He decided to put an end to his life for which purpose
he went to the river Sarayū. All the dependants followed
him. While the great mass of people who thronged
both the banks of the river burst out into weeping Śrī
Rāma and his followers drowned themselves in the
waters of the Sarayū, and their spirits attained Vai-
kuṇṭha. (Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, Kamba Rāmāyaṇa and
Tulasīdāsa Rāmāyaṇa).
<LEND>
