<L>5699<pc>644-b<k1>रति<k2>रति<h>I
RATI I¦. Wife of Kāmadeva and some Purāṇas hold
the view that Kāma was the son of Dharma whose
father was Brahmā. But, the story of Kāma and Rati
is described in the Kālikāpurāṇa as follows.
<div n="NI"/>Brahmā created ten prajāpatis. A beautiful lady
called Sandhyā was his next creation. As soon as she was
born, seeing her exquisite beauty Brahmā and the prajā-
patis jumped to their feet. All of them thought in the
same way. While the court of Brahmā was in such a
perplexed confusion, an extremely handsome person
emerged from his mind. Fish was the symbol on his
flag, and he aked Brahmā thus: “Oh father, what
should I do? Give me a suitable name and you should
also decide upon a place and position and also a wife
for me.” Brahmā told him as follows:—“You be moving
about everywhere in this world (full of men and-
women) engaged in the eternal function of creation with
the five arrows of flower in your hands and thus multiply
the population. Your arrows will go everywhere and no
one, not even the Devas will dare to obstruct your
arrows. Everyone will yield to your behests. Viṣṇu, Śiva
and I also will yield before your arrows. You will enter
the hearts of living beings in invisible form and giving
them happiness engage yourself in eternal creation. The
chief aim and object of your arrows of flower will be the
hearts of living beings. You will be given a suitable
name just now.”
<div n="NI"/>The prajāpatis, who understood the wish of Brahmā,
after mutual consultation said: “You emerged churning
our minds. Therefore, you will become famous under
the name Manmatha (he who churns the mind). You
will lay low Śiva's haughtiness and conceit. Oh! best
among men, Dakṣa, chief among the prajāpatis, will
give you a wife.”
<div n="NI"/>Happily pleased at the above words of Brahmā Kāma
held up in his hands the bow and arrows of flowers
and decided to shoot five arrows, i.e. harṣaṇam (pleas-
ing or gladdening), Rocanam (attracting or tempting),
mohanam (deluding or infatuating), śoṣaṇam (weaken-
ing) and māraṇam (killing). He decided to use the
arrows first against Brahmā and then against the prajā-
patis. Accordingly the arrows shot forth and Brahmā
and all the prajāpatis overwhelmed by sexual passion
stared at Sandhyādevī. Sandhyā also got excited and
from her body sprouted up 49 parts; 64 kalās (arts)
also were born from her. She used incessantly against
the leaders of the world (Brahmā and others) who
were downed by the arrows of sexual passion, arrows
dear to Manmatha. The expressions of Brahmā made
Sandhyā sick with love.
<div n="NI"/>Śiva, who was just then travelling along the sky, seeing
the boisterous exhibitions of passion by Brahmā and
others alighted there. He ridiculed Brahmā for his dis-
play of passion towards his own daughter Sandhyā and
spoke further like this: “This Kāma too is a fool. He
tested his arrows here itself, he has no sense of propriety
and discretion.”
<div n="NI"/>Brahmā was thoroughly ashamed at the words of Śiva.
He perspired and swept with his hands the drops of
sweat that oozed from his body. With great difficulty he
controlled his passion and gave up Sandhyā. From
[Page645-a+ 63]
the drops of sweat falling on the ground from the body
of Brahmā were born the pitṛs called Agniṣvāttas and
the Barhiṣadas, the former 64,000 in number and the
latter 4,80,000. Drops of sweat from the bodies of the
prajāpatis also fell on the ground and from them were
born the Devas. The pitṛs called Somapās are the sons
of Kratu; those called Svakālikas are the sons of
Vasiṣṭha; sons of Pulastya are called Ājyapās and
Havirbhuks are the sons of Aṅgiras.
<div n="NI"/>Brahmā, who was angry that Kāma shot his arrows
against him in the presence of Śiva cursed the former
that he would be burnt to ashes in the fire of Śiva's
eyes, and Kāma trembling with fear at the curse pros-
trated at the feet of Brahmā and wept Then Brahmā
said that though he would die in the fire of Śiva's eyes,
he would be born again.
<div n="NI"/>From the drops of perspiration that fell on the ground
from Dakṣa's body arose a beautiful woman, and Dakṣa
told Kāma that the woman, his daughter would
become famous as Rati devī. Dakṣa gave Rati Devī
to Kāma to be his wife. Thus did Rati become
Kāma's wife. (For the second birth of Rati see under
Pradyumna and for other details see under Kāma.)
<LEND>
