<L>5869<pc>659-b<k1>शबरिमल<k2>शबरिमल
ŚABARIMALA¦ (ŚABARI MOUNTAIN). A sacred
place in South India in the eastern region of Kerala on
a mountain called Śabarimala. It is not quite certain
whether the name of this mountain is in any way related
to Śabarī, to whom Śrī Rāma had given salvation. At
any rate a very ancient temple with Śāstā as the presid-
ing deity therein is found at Śabarimala today. It is
proof positive of the great sanctity attached to the anci-
ent temple that every year lakhs of devotees from all
parts of India visit it braving dense forests, mountains
and wild beasts on their way. Historical evidence
about the origin of the temple or its philosophical
importance is sparse, but there is a legend, more illu-
minating than facts of history, about Śāstā (Ayyappan)
the deity installed in the temple. The legend is as
follows—
<div n="NI"/>In olden days the royal family of the Pāṇḍyas divided
itself into two branches, one of them settling down at
Velliyūr and the other at Madura. When the king of
Madura one day went ahunting in the forest he met
a handsome and very powerful and courageous Malayāli
youth. The king immediately took a liking for him and
appointed him as an officer in his army. The youth
gradually rose up in military service to become the
Commander-in-Chief. The other officers, who were
jealous due to the rise of the youth—Ayyappan—began
conspiring to drive him out. The queen became a
weapon in the hands of the conspirators, and at their
instance she pretended herself to be very ill and lay in
a fainting fit. All the physicians acknowledged defeat
in curing her. Then a physician, an agent of the conspira-
tors, came forward and assured the king that he would
cure the queen of her illness within one and a half hours
if a leopard's milk was made available. The king told
Ayyappan about it.
<div n="NI"/>Ayyappan went into the forest and returned to the
palace with many she-leopards. He rode a tiger lead-
ing the leopards. People in the royal court were fright-
ened by the sight of the leopards. The King realised
that Ayyappan was not an ordinary person. Being
questioned about him by the King, Ayyappan replied
that God was his father and the whole world his home.
As he did not like to live any further with tale-bearers
and conspirators he returned to Kerala.
[Page660-a+ 65]
Ayyappan's departure made the King sad and very
restless in mind. After giving all his immovable pro-
perty on rent the King followed Ayyappan to Kerala
taking all his ornaments, jars and other utensils, and
came at last to Pantalam. This region of Kerala was
then in the control of a petty Chieftain called Kaip-
puzha Tampān. The King of Madura purchased some
land from the Tampān, put up a palace there and lived
therein with the members of his family.
<div n="NI"/>Ayyappasvāmī on his way back to Kerala met Paraśu-
rāma, who told the former that he had already, for the
protection of Kerala, installed on mountains and the
sea-coast idols of his (Ayyappasvāmī) and that he would
install another idol of Ayyappan at Śabarimala where
they had now met each other. From that day onwards
Ayyappasvāmī took his abode there.
<div n="NI"/>One of those days the Pāṇḍyan king living at Pan-
talam had a dream, and in that dream Ayyappasvāmī
appeared and told him that he (Ayyappan) was living
at Śabarimala and the King might meet the Svāmī if
he went there. The next day morning the King with
his retinue started for Śabarimala. At Śabarimala the
King got the forest cleared and made a search of the
ground where he found an idol installed by Paraśurāma.
The King built a temple there and installed the idol of
Ayyappasvāmī therein. He also got necessary purifica-
tory ceremonies conducted in the temple by the famous
tantrī (high-priest) Tāzhamaṇ. A routine programme
for the conduct of affairs in the temple was fixed. As
it was difficult for men to live in the forest infested by
wild beasts and conduct pūjā etc. daily, it was fixed that
pūjās need be conducted only for five days in every
month and that Makarasaṃkrānti should be the annual
festival day. From the first of Makaraṃ (January) for
five days it was to be utsava with the deity led in pro-
cession. On the fifth of Makaram every year a
‘Kalabham’ and on the seventh day a ‘guruti’ also were
ordained.
<div n="NI"/>On the annual festival day the temple priest, the senior
pilgrim, mārārs and other employees go to Śabarimala
carrying with them rice etc. for food and calling
aloud ‘Svāmiye Śaraṇam Ayyappa’ (Oh! lord Ayyappa!
you are our refuge), devotees climb the mountain to-
day also repeating this slogan. (See under Śāstā).
<LEND>
