<L>5974<pc>668-b<k1>शकुन<k2>शकुन
ŚAKUNA¦(OMENS).
<div n="NI"/>1) {%General.%} In ancient times people in all countries used
to consider Śakunas to be harbingers of good or evil things.
Today also many people believe in omens. In India
[Page669-a+ 65]
Śakuna had developed as a science even in olden days.
A general description about omens, good and bad,
according to the Indian concept, is given below.
<div n="NI"/>Mixed medicines, black grains, cotton, grass, dried cow-
dung, charcoal, molasses, one whose head is shaven clean
or whose body is smeared with oil or who is naked; flesh-
eater; iron, dirt, skin, hair of the head, insane person,
eunuch, prison, guard; women, who are either carrying
or are widows; oil cake, paddy husk, ashes, skull, bone,
broken vessel etc. are evil omens. Broken, fierce or mur-
muring instrumental music also is a bad omen.
<div n="NI"/>It is a good omen to hear the voice of beckoning (come)
in front of the traveller, but it is not good if the voice is
heard from behind. It is good if the voice of farewell (go)
is heard from behind, but is bad to be heard in the front.
Disapproving or prohibitive words like “Where are you
going, stop, don't go”, “what is to be done by going
there?” etc. will cause death. It is a bad omen to see
carnivorous birds perched on the top of flag-staff etc.
For vehicles to bump, weapons to break and head to
get wounded by dashing against doors etc. as also for
umbrella or clothes to fall down are ill omens. Praising
or worshipping Viṣṇu will do away with the inauspicious
results of ill omens. But, if evil omens are seen conti-
nuously the traveller should return home.
<div n="NI"/>White flowers are good omens. Full pots are the best
of omens. Flesh, fish, sound from afar, old man, soli-
tary man, cow, goat, ox, horse, elephant, devas, burning
fire, Dūrvā grass, fresh cow-dung, prostitute, gold,
silver, gems, Orris root, mustard, medicinal herbs rooted
out of soil, Bengal gram, weapon, sword, stool, royal
symbols, dead body being carried without lamentation,
fruits, ghee, curdled milk, milk, akṣata, mirror, honey,
conch, sugarcane, auspicious words, music by devotees,
loud thunder and lightning are auspicious omens.
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Two kinds of omens.%} Omens are divided into two varie-
ties, dīpta (glowing) and śānta (quiescent, mild). Glow-
ing omens bring about auspicious results and the other in-
auspicious results. There are six ways or elements, which
make omens dīptam, i.e. velā (time), dik (region), deśa
(place), Karaṇa (action), ruta (cry) and jāti (kind). The
power or effect of dīpta increases in ascending order.
<div n="NI"/>To see creatures, which move about during day time as
moving about during night and vice-versa is velādīpta.
In the case of stars, lagnas (the dominant zodiac) and
planets, those which are virulent are considered to
be dīptas. With regard to stars and lagnas, those
which the Sun enters into are dhūmita, those where-
in the Sun is already present are jvalita and those from
which the sun has left are Aṃ ariṇī. These three are
dīptas and the rest śāntas. (This is called velādīpta).
When dik (region) is dīpta it is called digdīpta.
To see forest animals in village and village-animals in
forest is digdīpta. To see good brahmins at inauspi-
cious places is deśadīpta. To see some one doing work
not ordained to his caste is karaṇadīpta. To hear differ-
ent horrible voices is rutadīpta. To see purely flesh-
eating animals is jātidīpta. If all the characteristics of
dīpta do not synchronise but differ from one another it
is called śānta and if the characteristics of dīpta and
śānta are mixed up it is called miśra.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Birds, animals etc.%} If the cāṣa bird (wild crow) makes
sound when the king gets out of the palace, he will meet
with dishonour. If the sound is heard on the left side,
there will be quarrel, but food will be served. If the
[Page669-b+ 65]
bird is sighted on the right side at the start of the
journey, it is a good omen. If the peacock makes differ-
ent sounds, threats from thieves will result. If a deer
is seen in front of the king going out on a journey, death
will happen to him. To see the monkey-bear, rat, tiger,
lion, cat and donkey coming in the opposite direction
also will bring about death. Donkey braying in awkward
notes is also inauspicious. To see kapiñjala bird on the
left side is an excellent omen; on the right side also it is
not bad. But, behind the person, it is a bad omen.
Tittiri bird also on the rear is not good.
<div n="NI"/>It is always a good omen if the deer, boar and spotted
deer cross the path from the left to the right side; the
opposite of it is bad omen. It is a favourable omen if the
ox, horse, jackal, tiger, lion, cat and donkey pass from
the right to the left side. It is auspicious to see the
females of the jackal etc. on the right side and the
males on the left. To hear the serpent, hare, boar and
wild lizard named is good, but to see them is not so.
Contrary to this is the effect to see the monkey, ox etc.
The result of the important and powerful omens witness-
ed at the start of the journey will be experienced the
very same day. The omen of the intoxicated, those
craving for food, children, people quarrelling and those
who stand away from the limits of the road is effectless.
To hear the jackal howl once, twice, thrice or four
times is a good omen, but to hear it five or six times
is bad, The seventh time is good.
<div n="NI"/>If heard for more than the seventh time it will have no
effect. Dīpta omen facing the Sun will horripilate
men, cause fear in the case of vehicles and is to
be greatly feared. If sāraṅga (lotus, deer, elephant,
peacock, cuckoo, lion, horse etc.) is met as the first
thing in an auspicious place its good effect will last for
one year, and if these are met at the inauspicious place,
the result will be bad. Everybody should see sāraṅga
at some auspicious place every dawn.
<div n="NI"/>If the crow is found crowing in fear on the left side of
camps put up for the army of the King, the head of
the army will have to face great threats. If the crow,
perches on and pecks on the shadow, vehicle, slippers,
umbrella, clothes etc. the owner of those things will
die. If they are respected by the crow, honour will
accrue to their owner. If the crow flies about the
entrance of the house it means that he, who had left
the house will return. If the crows bring and scatter
red coloured and baked things in the courtyard, the
owner of the house will meet with imprisonment. If
the crow carries to a house something yellow in colour,
gold or silver, the owner of the house will get such
things. Whatever thing the crow carries away from the
house, such things therein will be destroyed. If the
crow vomits raw flesh in the rear of the house, the
owner of it will come into possession of wealth; if soil is
deposited thus, land will be acquired. If gem is
deposited, extensive lands will come to the owner of
the house. If the crow flies in the same direction as the
one chosen by the traveller, prosperity and success
will result to him and if it flies in the opposite direction
not only will the traveller not achieve his object but,
he will also meet with danger. If the crows come crowing
against one starting on a journey, it will be hindered.
To see the crow on the left side is a good omen. If it
is seen on the right side, the journey will not end in
success. It is very good if the crow flies in the same
[Page670-a+ 64]
direction as the traveller on his left side, if on
the right side the result will be of medium nature. If
it flies in the opposite direction on the left side the tra-
veller will face hindrance. If the crow flies into the
house when one is about to start on the journey, it
means the journey may be begun. The crow which
looks at the sun with one eye and perched on one leg
is surely indicative of fear for the traveller. If it is in
the hollow of a tree great calamities will happen. To
dream of crow with its mouth full of excretion is indi-
cative of all-round success.
<div n="NI"/>If the dog enters and barks in the house the result will be
sure death of the owner of the house. But, if the dog
smells on the left side of the man it is good, and if it
smells on the right side, it is bad. If the dogs come
against the person about to start on a journey, it will
cause hindrance to him. If the dog stands blocking his
path there will be threat from thieves. If it comes fac-
ing him with a piece of bone in its mouth, he will fail
to achieve the object of his travel; if it comes biting a
cord, the same will be the result. It is auspicious to see
dog, which carries a slipper in its mouth or the mouth
of which is filled with flesh. Fear will overtake him in
front of whom the dog urinates and goes away. But if
not a bitch and if, after urination, it goes to an auspi-
cious place, to the shade of an auspicious tree or to-
wards an auspicious thing, then it is a good omen. The
same considerations are valid in the case of the jackal
etc.
<div n="NI"/>If cows cry without cause or reason, it indicates ruin
to the master. If the cry is in an awkward tone, death
will result. If the ox murmurs during night, it is good
for the master. Ox tied to a cord also is good omen.
If cows are found to treat their calves without love, it
spells ruin for pregnant women. It is a good omen to
see cows which have got wet and whose horns are smeared
with earth. These considerations apply to buffaloes as
well.
<div n="NI"/>If elephants indulge in the sexual act in villages, it
augurs ill to the villages. If the she-elephant delivers
or gets mad in the country, i.e. not in the forest, it
spells ruin to king. Ruin to the King will be the result if
the elephant objects to his mounting it or runs back
home or if the mad elephant is found without madness.
It is an auspicious omen if the elephant places its right
foot on the left foot of it and also if it holds its tusk
with its trunk.
<LEND>
