<L>6028<pc>676-a<k1>समाधिछेट्टि<k2>समाधिछेट्टि
SAMĀDHICHEṬṬI¦. A Vaiśya who became learned
and abstemious by the grace of Devī. The story of this
Vaiśya, who ran away from the cruel and wicked
treatment that he had suffered from his wife and
children, and took to spiritual knowledge by the force
of circumstances was told to Janamejaya by Vyāsa.
After telling several stories about the kind regard of
Devī towards those who worship her with devotion,
Vyāsa continued as follows:—
<div n="NI"/>During the time of Svārociṣa Manu, there lived a
King named Suratha. Because of his liberality and
truthfulness he had very few enemies. While he was
ruling over the kingdom known as Kolāpura, once the
low caste people of the mountains fought a battle with
the King. Though the army of the low castes was
small it was the King who sustained defeat. He
returned to the palace thoughtful. He had no peace of
mind. So he went to the forest to get peace. After
travelling for a long time on horse-back, he reached the
hermitage of the sage Sumedhas. Forgetting himself
in the peaceful stillness of the hermitage, the King got
down from the horse and sat under a tree. The hermit
Sumedhas came there and talked with the King.
The King told his story to the hermit, who invited the
King to live with him. Thus the King lived in the
hermitage eating fruits, roots etc.
<div n="NI"/>The King found it difficult to reconcile himself with
the purity and simplicity of the hermit's surroundings.
He always thought of his wife and children. He was
troubled in mind by thinking that the money kept in
the treasury would be wasted by others. Thus thinking
about many things, with a troubled mind, the King
was sitting under a tree near the hermitage once when
he saw another man coming towards him, with a
troubled mind like himself. They talked with each
other. The new-comer said to the King “I am a
Vaiśya. My name is Samādhiceṭṭi. My wife and
children love wealth. They want to take possession of
my wealth and to waste it. But I was against it. I did
not favour unnecessary expenditure. They resolved to
remove the obstacle from their path, and began to
make preparation for it secretly. I understood it and
fearing death I ran away from the house.”
<div n="NI"/>As soon as the king heard this story he said his own
story to the Vaiśya. The Vaiśya continued. “Oh!
Still, my mind is troubled. I am worried about my
wife and children. They will be put to much difficulty
if I am not there to look after them. Who is there to
support them without me? All the children are lean.
My wife also is likewise, lean. They are all always
ill. What will they do without me? While I think of
all these things I have no peace of mind at all.”
<div n="NI"/>Suratha: “What a fool are you! You yourself have
said that all your children are wicked and cruel.
Moreover they and their mother joining together had
[Page676-b+ 64]
been trying to murder you. Why do you feel so
miserable about such a wife and children?”
<div n="NI"/>When the King had finished saying thus much,
Sumedhas came there. To remove the darkness of
illusion from their minds, the hermit taught them the
Nine-lettered Mantra (spell) with prayer and medi-
tation. Thus giving them the mantra, the teacher
hermit advised them to go to the bank of the river and
select a suitable place and worship Devī with devotion
and concentration of mind. Accordingly they went to
the bank of the river and selected a pure and solitary
place, and concentrating their minds on Devī, began
to meditate and worship her taking only very little
food. Thus engaged in deep meditation they spent two
years. One day in a dream Devī appeared to them.
She was clad in red clothes, and wore beautiful
ornaments. They were full of joy on seeing the goddess.
The third year of the penance was over. But Devī did
not appear directly before them. In the third year
they took only water. They finished the fourth year
without seeing the goddess. They decided to do severe
penance. Their intention was to offer their bodies to
Devī. So they made a triangular cavity, with three
parts each having an extension of 1½ ft. and made
the walls of the cavity firm and kindled a large fire in
it. The King and the Vaiśya began to cut pieces of
flesh from their bodies and offered to Devī in the
fire, and with the blood coming from the body they
performed sacrifice to Devī. Instantly Devī appeared
before them and asked them what boon they wanted.
The King wanted to get his kingdom back. Devī
said. “You return home. Your enemies shall leave the
kingdom. Your ministers will fall at your feet and beg
your pardon. You can rule over your country for ten
thousand years. After that you will take rebirth as
Sāvarṇi Manu, the son of the Sun.”
<div n="NI"/>What Samādhi Ceṭṭi wished was a life of self-renun-
ciation. Devī gave him the wisdom and knowledge to
renounce everything he had and to live a life of
complete abstinence. Then Devī disappeared. The
King returned to his kingdom and resumed his rule.
Ceṭṭi renounced everything and wandered about
immersed in meditation on Devī. (Devī Bhāgavata,
Skandha 5).
<LEND>
