<L>6064<pc>679-a<k1>संघम्<k2>संघम्
SAṂGHAM¦ (SAṄGHAM). An organisation formed in
olden days for the cultivation of Śentamil (classic
Tamil) literature, which took its origin in south
Drāviḍa land in the 4th century B.C. The Pāṇḍyas set
up three Saṅghams for the promotion of this literature,
the first one in southern Madura. When the city was
swept by erosion of the sea they set up the second
Saṅgham at Kapāṭapura. When Kapāṭapura also was
destroyed by the sea, the third Saṅgham was founded
in Drāviḍa Madura. The first Saṅgham was called
Mutarcaṅkam, the second Iṭaiccaṅkam and the third
one Kaṭaiccaṅkam. Reliable information about the
first two Saṅghams is not available. But, there are
reasons to believe that a Saṅgham called Kataiccaṅkam
flourished for about six hundred years from 2nd
century B.C. to the close of the 4th century A.D.
(History of Kerala Literature by Ullūr, Part 1, Page
47).
<div n="NI"/>The Pāṇḍyan King had built at Madura a hall
(maṇḍapa) for the poets and scholars of the third
Saṅgham to assemble together to produce their works.
Even to this day there exists a temple called
Saṅghattārkovil at the south-western corner of the
outer sector of the Sundareśvara temple. There the
idols of Sarasvatī and of the fortynine poets of the
Saṅgham are being worshipped even today. The growth
and influence of the Buddhist and the Jain religions
and also that of the Pallava royal dynasty, contributed
to the downfall of the Saṅgham. The Saṅgham poets
have written many excellent books. According to
legends, Agastyam is a text on grammar of the first
Saṅgham and Tolkāpyam of the second Saṅgham.
There were authoritative text books on music written by
the last poets of the Saṅgham. But, none of these books
has been unearthed yet. Again, references are found
to dramas like Muruval, Jayantam, etc. They too
have not yet been found out. Five mahākāvyas (Epic
poems) and five short Kāvyas also belong to Saṅgham
works. Puranānūru. Akanānūru, Patiṭṭuppattu, Aiṃ
kurunūru, Kalittokai, Kuruntokai, Paripāṭal and
Naṭṭiṇai are included in the Saṅgham work called
Eṭṭuttokai. Most of them are collections of many com-
positions. The authorship of the four hundred songs in
Puranānūru is distributed among nearly 160 poets.
Aiṃ Kurunūru contains five hundred songs by five
poets. These five hundred songs were collected by the
scholar, Kūṭalūr kizhār, on the orders of the Cera
King, Ceraliruṃpozhai. Patiṭṭippattu is a collection
of songs composed by ten poets in praise of the Cera
Kings. But, only eight of these from two to nine are
available yet. Pattuppāṭṭu comprised of the follow-
[Page679-b+ 63]
ing works like Tirumurukāttuppaṭai, etc. Tirukkural,
Nālaṭiyar etc. are among the eighteen works under
the group Patineṇkīzhkkaṇakku. Cilappadikāram,
Maṇimekhalai, Jīvakacintāmaṇi, Kuṇḍalakeśī and
Valaiyāpati are the five great kāvyas and Nīlakeśi,
Cūḍāmaṇi, Yaśodākāvyam, Nāgakumāra-Kāvyam and
Udayakumārakāvyam (Udayaṇankatai) are the five
short (laghu) kāvyas. Amongst the above kāvyas
Maṇimekhalai and Kuṇḍalakeśi are Buddhist kāvyas
and Cintāmaṇi and the five short kāvyas are Jain
works. The last seven books might have been written
after the Saṅgham period. Tiruttakkatevar, author of
Cintāmaṇi, lived in eighth century A.D. Some of the
songs in Puranānūru are the oldest among the works of
the Saṅgham period. References to Cera Kings are
found in many of these works.
<LEND>
