<L>6274<pc>692-b<k1>शरलोमा<k2>शरलोमा
ŚARALOMĀ¦. A maharṣi, the father of Dāśūra.
Vasiṣṭha once told Śrī Rāma the story of Dāśūra to
prove that the world is all an illusion.
<div n="NI"/>Dāśūra was the only son of Śaralomā, a muni, who
performed tapas in the plains of the mountain in
Magadha. Dāśūra too did tapas in another part of
the mountain. While the father and the son were
living happily the father entered samādhi and the son
wept over the loss of his father. Then a forest-nymph
comforted him with celestial advice.
<div n="NI"/>Dāśūra performed his father's obsequies. He began
thinking that the earth was impure and that the top of
trees was pure and decided to do tapas in such a manner
that he got power to sit on the branches and leaves of
trees. Accordingly he made a big pit of fire and began
making offerings of flesh cut from his body into the fire.
Agnibhagavān (Fire-deity) appeared and asked him to
choose the boons he wanted. Dāśūra told Agni as
follows: “Oh Lord; I do not find any pure spot on this
earth, which is full of created living beings. You should
therefore, grant me the power to live on the tops of
trees.” Agni granted him the boon.
<div n="NI"/>Dāśūra then climbed a big tree in the forest and occu-
pied, without the least fear, a tender leaf at the top of
the topmost branch of the tree. He there assumed the
Padmāsana (the lotus seat for meditation). His mind
was functioning actively as it had not been turned in-
wards into true knowledge. With his mind in such a
state he performed yajña. He continued performing
yajñas like gomedha, a vamedha etc. mentally for ten
years. Then self-illuminating knowledge arose in his
mind. and he saw a beautiful forest-nymph seated
beautifully attired at the end of the tender leaf on
which he was sitting. She was looking very sad, her
head bent down. Dāśūra asked her, who she was so
much beautiful and attractive as to evoke love even in
Kāma (the God of love). She answered him in a sweet
voice as follows: “Very rare desires in life may be got if
great men are requested for. I am the forest-nymph
of this forest beautified by the tree you sit on and by
trees and creepers equally beautiful. An assembly of the
forest-nymphs has been held to celebrate a festival for
[Page693-a+ 64]
the worship of Kāmadeva on trayodasī in the śuklapakṣa
of the month of Caitra. I too went there, and I, who
am childless, felt sorry in mind to see the others petting
their children on their laps. But, why should I be sad
when you, who can give supplicants anything they wish
for, are here? You should, therefore, bless me with a
child or else I will end my life in fire.”
<div n="NI"/>Dāśūra blessed her to have a son within a month. He
told her also that it would be difficult for the son to
acquire knowledge as he was got on the insistence that
she would die in fire unless she got him. He did not
grant her request for permission to live with him; he
went into the forests leaving her behind him.
<div n="NI"/>The son of the forest-nymph became twelve years old.
Then, one day, she took the child to the muni; left it
with him and went away. One day the father began
telling the son a story, on the top of the tree, and
Vasiṣṭha, who was going by the sky in invisible form
to bathe in Kailāsagaṅgā, heard the story. Vasiṣṭha
hid himself on the tree and listened to the story.
<div n="NI"/>It was the story of king Svottha that the muni was tell-
ing his son as follows:—“He was famous for his noble
qualities and unique prowess. He possessed three bodies,
which possessed capacity to rule the country. One of
the three bodies was the best, the other midway between
good and bad and the third bad. The very origin of
the King was in the wide and extensive sky; like birds
he lived in the sky. He built a city in the sky with
fourteen streets and three divisions or sectors. There
were also forests, woods and mountains for games in
the city; seven big tanks, wavy-white with creepers of
pearl and two lamps, spreading heat and coolness,
burning always. The King, who went about all his time
in this vast city, built in it many movable inner dwell-
ings, and they were divided between the upper and
lower parts of the city. They were thatched with a
kind of black grass. Each inner house had nine doors,
some of them windows, which admitted air always. In
each house five lamps burned, the lamps resting on three
pillars and a white piece of wood. Each house was
glitteringly plastered and had courtyards. A particular
sect of bhūtas, who ever feared light, guarded the
houses. When the houses created thus by magic moved
from one place to another, King Svottha enjoyed, like
birds in nests, playing various games therein. The
king, who possessed three bodies, used to go out
after playing for some time with the guards, and run
about like one possessed of a desire to occupy houses,
newly built, and then reach the city, which was like a
Gandharva city. Frail and unsettled in mind, the king,
off and on, developed a will to die, and accordingly he
died. Just as waves come up in the sea, the king used
to be born again from the sky and to attend to worldly
affairs. At times he used to repent about and weep over
his actions asking himself what he, the fool, was doing
and why he should be sad like that. At other times he
used to feel elated and enthusiastic. Briefly put, he
used to be, by turns drinking, walking, jumping, expand-
ing, contracting, feeling, drowsy and then exuberant.
The great and handsome king was actually, like the
sea, rendered restless by wind, possessed by various
moods.
<div n="NI"/>The father was describing a philosophy of life figuratively
to his son, but the boy understood nothing. Then, as
[Page693-b+ 65]
requested by the son, the father explained to him the
meaning of the story as follows:
<div n="NI"/>Svottha was concretised conception born out of the
ultimate sky. Conceptions originate and die automatic-
ally. The whole visible world is imaginary. The world
is there only when there is conception and in its absence
no world exists. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva and Indra are
only parts of that conception. It is conception itself,
which creates the world of three cities in nothingness or
vacuum. On account of the blessing (will) of that
fundamental Caitanya (awareness, life) the formless con-
ception attains Brahmanhood (the universal self) and
engages itself in the process of creation. The glittering
city said to have been created in the sky is the fourteen
worlds, the gardens in it are forests and woods, the play
hills therein are mountains like the Himālayas, Meru
etc. The two eternal lamps of heat and cold of the
story refer to the Sun and Moon. The creepers or
garlands of pearl refer to rivers. Special gems have
been described as tendrils of lotus and fire in the ocean
and the seven seas are described respectively as lotus and
the seven tanks. The statement that in this three-tiered
city the king of conception built play-houses referred to
the creation of individual bodies. The houses were con-
nected as those in the upper, middle and lower parts
to denote living beings in the three worlds, Deva-
loka, Manuṣyaloka and Pātāla. Movement is the
journey of bodies due to the flow of Prāṇa (breath).
Pieces of wood refer to bones and the plastering is skin.
Black grass said to have been used for thatching is hair
on the head. The nine doors are the nine openings in
the body. Windows refer to the ear, nose etc. The
hand arms etc. are roads and the five sense organs,
lamps. The guards, who shun and quit light, are the
egoes which run away from knowledge and discretion.
The king of conception or imagination born from non-
materials finds enjoyment in the house of the body,
but the enjoyment is only ephemeral. Imagination
develops a moment and is extinguished, like the lamp,
the next moment. The place or status of conceptions
in the body may be compared to that of waves in the
ocean. When desire takes place for things conceived it
returns to the ‘body-house,’ which is to be born, and it
ends or perishes on achievement. Rebirth due to desire
(will-power) is never for happiness, but is for unending
sorrow and pain. The wide world causes sorrow be-
cause it is felt to be real. Absence of this feeling ends
the sorrow as night swallows clouds. Lamentation is
the appeal or expression of the mind remembering for-
bidden practices in life and ānanda happiness, is the
proud state of mind remembering noble practices.
The three bodies of the king according to the three
states-the best or highest, the middle one and the low-
denote the three attributes (Sattva rajas-tamo guṇas)
Causative of the existence of the world. The lowest
of the attributes (tamoguṇa) or conceptions according
to them, getting more and more pain-giving on account
of uncultured action lead one to lower forms of life like
the worm, tree, grass etc. Conception of real knowledge
and truth is realisation of duty, righteousness and
wisdom. It is next to the state of salvation called
Deveśvara state. Rājasa (the middle attribute) guṇa
functions as material activities in the form of attachment
to wife, son, wealth etc. When one has rejected the
forms of guṇas (conceptions) and the very conception
[Page694-a+ 65]
is thus annihilated, one attains the supreme state.
Therefore, Oh! son! you reject all external perceptions,
control the mind by itself and completely annihilate all
internal and external conceptions. Whether you live in
heaven, on earth or in pātāla and do intense tapas for
thousands of years, unless conception is eliminated you
will not attain salvation.
<div n="NI"/>After hearing the above explanation about the illusions
in life, from his hiding place Vasiṣṭha went away.
(Jñānavāsiṣṭha, Canto 17).
<LEND>
