<L>6312<pc>697-b<k1>शरीर<k2>शरीर
ŚARĪRA¦. (BODY). Body is constituted of the five
elements, earth, water, fire, air and sky (ether). What
is solid or hard in the body is earth; liquid, is water;
hot or burning, fire; what gives motion to the body is
air and what are pores in the body is sky.
<div n="NI"/>Body is that which exists and functions with the five
organs of knowledge eye, ear, nose, tongue and skin,
and the five organs of action like Upastha (sex organ),
Pāṇi (hand), Pāda (leg) and Vāṇī (speech). The body
depends on the six tastes, sweet, sour, saltish, bitter,
hot and astringent. (Kaṭu, amla, madhura, lavaṇa,
tikta and kaṣāya). The body is composed of seven
internal elements (dhātus) of seven colours, white, red,
dark (black), black and white, yellow, brassy and
faint-white (Pāṇḍura). Vātapittakaphas (wind, bile
and phlegm) are intertwined in the body. Since the
body is formed of vital fluids from the sex organs of
the father and the mother it is dviyoni (males with male
and females with female organs of reproduction). The
body exists by four kinds of foods, bhojya, bhakṣya, khā-
dya and lehya. After coitus, within one night, the male
and female semen and blood combine into one body in
the womb (Kalala). Within seven days it becomes foamy
(budbuda). After a fortnight it becomes solid (piṇḍa)
and after one month hard (kaṭhina). During the
second month the head of the child is formed; in the
third month its feet: in the fourth its ankles, stomach
and waist are formed. In the fifth month is formed
the back (Pṛṣṭha) and face, nose, eyes and ears are
formed in the sixth month. During the seventh month
life enters the child's body. By the eighth month all the
signs of the human being are completed in the child.
If the vitality and effulgence of the mother are more
than those of the father the off-spring will be female
and vice versa; if both are in exactly equal proportions
the child will be a eunuch, neither male nor female. If
the parents were sad and worried during the time of
the mother's conception, the child born would be either
blind, lame or a pigmy. If the semen is cleft into two
by wind (in the womb) the mother would give birth to
twins. In the ninth month the child will be gifted
with knowledge and it will remember to what caste it
belonged and what all good and evil actions it did in
its previous life.
<LEND>
