<L>6323<pc>698-a<k1>सर्पबलि<k2>सर्पबलि
SARPABALI¦. An offering made by Hindus in South
India to propitiate serpents. Serpents are pleased by
songs by Pulluvan and Pulluvatti (Male and female
members of a Hindu sub-caste). To draw Kalams
(drawings on floor conveying certain esoteric meanings),
to make offerings and for the Pulluvars to sing—these
form important elements of Sarpabali. The bali has
a connection with the story of Khāṇḍavadāha. The
legend behind the bali is that a Pulluva woman saved
Takṣaka, who escaped to the ocean after the Khāṇḍava
forest was burnt down. Songs by Pulluvan and Pullu-
vatti are unavoidable items in Sarpabali.
<div n="NI"/>Drawing the Kalam is a very important item in Sarpa-
bali. It is drawn on a platform made of puṭṭumaṇṇu
(small heaps of earth thrown up by earthworms and ter-
mites), the platform being demarcated by four pieces
of arecanut wood. The platform is covered with silk
and tender coconut leaves are hung all around it. The
Kalam is drawn with rice powder, and other coloured
powders. The husk of paddy burnt into charcoal is
powdered and with it serpents are sketched first on the
maṇḍapa (platform). The nāga drawings are tinted
with colours. The (colour) powders are collected in
coconut shells and sprinkled on the drawings through
holes in shells. Pulluvas exhibit wonderful artistic talents
in making the drawings.
<div n="NI"/>When the kalam is drawn worship of nāga is begun
compulsorily by a male member of the house, and he is
technically called ‘Kalattil Kaimal’. He has been observ-
ing ‘vrata’ during two days previous to the pūjā
(worship). Having taken his bath and wearing an
additional cloth across his shoulders (Uttarīya) he
comes with water in a jar. Four lamps should be burn-
ing on four sides of the kalam. Also, paddy, rice,
tender coconut, milk, fruit etc. should be placed on its
four sides. As directed by the Pulluvan the ‘Kaimal’
conducts the worship by offering flower, water etc. The
Kaimal is to sit on each of the four sides of the kalam
and do the pūjā. Then wicks (made of cloth) should
be lighted, water sprinkled on it and with that the
Kaimal should go around the kalam thrice. With the
wicks placed on a leaf with paddy underneath it and
also with burning camphor he should go round the
[Page698-b+ 65]
kalam. Then the Pulluvan playing on the Vīṇā in front
and a male member of the house with a vessel contain-
ing milk, a female member holding a lamp, two girls
holding brass plates and the Kaimal and all of them
following the Pulluvan go round the Kalam thrice and
proceed to the serpents' temple in the compound, pray
and return. After all these persons are seated, the
Kaimal washes the feet of and puts flowers on the heads
of the two girls, who had held the brass plates; seats
them on two pieces of round wood in the kalam. The
girls will have mirror etc. in their hands. They should
concentrate their eyes on the heads of the serpents. Now
begins the Pulluvan pāṭṭu (song by Pulluvan). At the
time of the worship they will be beating tunes on a brass
pot, music being made on the Vīṇā.
<div n="NI"/>‘Pulluvan pāṭṭu’ is the most important item in the whole
programme. The songs relate to the burning of the
khāṇḍava forest, Kāliyamardana (suppression of the
nāga king) etc. One Pulluvan sings songs and a second
one repeats them. A minimum of two Pulluva males
and two females are required for the purpose. As the
songs acquire momentum the girls begin to shake their
heads and to wipe off the kalam. Then the girls are
asked questions and they answer. Within a short time
the girls will swoon and fall on the ground. They are
brought back to consciousness by water being sprinkled
on them and by fanning. This is in general the nature
of a Sarpabali.
<LEND>
