<L>6360<pc>699-b<k1>शशिकला<k2>शशिकला
ŚAŚIKALĀ¦. Daughter of Subāhu, King of Kāśī. She
was married by a prince Sudarśana who had been
driven out of his kingdom by Yudhājit.
<div n="NI"/>As she became a young woman Śaśikalā heard about
Sudarśana, who lived in the forest with his mother and
fell in love with him. One night Devī appeared in
dream to her and told her that marriage with Sudarśana
would take place, and at those words of Devī she
awoke from sleep and began laughing. Though her
mother asked Śaśikalā about the reason for her laugh-
ing thus, she answered not, but continued laughing.
One day while she was picnicking in the Campaka
forest, an old brahmin came there and described to
her about the great personality and beauty of Sudar-
śana, who then was staying with his mother at
Bharadvājāśrama. Śaśikalā's heart yearned to be with
Sudarśana.
<div n="NI"/>Sudarśana, after the death of his father Dhruvasandhi,
lived with his mother Manoramā and her father. But,
Yudhājit killed Manoramā's mother also. It was after
this that Sudarśana and his mother took refuge in the
āśrama of Bharadvājamuni. One of those days, Niṣāda,
King of Śṛṅgiverapura and a friend of Sudarśana's
father (Dhruvasandhi) came to Bharadvājāśrama and
presented a chariot, which possessed mysterious powers,
to Sudarśana. The munis were pleased at this and
imparted to Sudarśana the Kāmarājamantra, which gave
one who practised it all that one desired, and after the
above incident Sudarśana began slowly to come out of
the āśrama. He went about the forests in the chariot
presented by Niṣāda, and he was astonished to find
many an armed soldier surround him wherever he
went. This happened because of the mysterious powers
of the chariot.
<div n="NI"/>It was at this time that King Subāhu decided to con-
duct the Svayaṃvara of his daughter Śaśikalā. Kings
from all lands came. Śaśikalā told her mother in secret
about her desire to marry Sudarśana, and the mother
in turn told about this to the father. But, he was not
for it. Then Śaśikalā sent a messenger secretly to
Sudar ana to request him to be present at the
Svayaṃvara, and Sudarśana and his mother started for
the palace of the King of Kāśī and when they reached
it, kings like Yudhājit had already come there. A
rumour was spread that Subāhu, insultingly ignoring
all the crowned heads, was going to marry his daughter
[Page700-a+ 64]
to Sudarśana, a mere beggar. The assembled Kings,
therefore, got themselves ready to pick a row with
Subāhu, but, he pacified them with the assurance that
the Svayaṃvara of Śaśikalā would formally be conduct-
ed and her husband could then be selected by herself.
That night Śaśikalā's parents tried their best to divert
her heart away from Sudarśana, to no purpose and the
same night she was duly married to him. By the next
morning news about the marriage became public and
all the Kings, who had come for the Svayaṃvara
decided in conference to kill Sudarśana on his way back
home with his wife, and abduct Śaśikalā. Accordingly
on the fourth day after the wedding when Sudarśana
and Śaśikalā were returning to Ayodhyā escorted by
the army allotted to them by Subāhu, King Yudhājit
and his followers attacked them from their hiding place.
In the battle that ensued Devī appeared and helped
Sudarśana, who defeated the enemies. People of
Ayodhyā received with enthusiasm the victorious Sudar-
śana and he was crowned their King. In later years he
became famous as emperor Sudarśana.
<LEND>
