<L>6398<pc>701-b<k1>शतरुद्र<k2>शतरुद्र
ŚATARUDRA¦. The story of Śatarudra was imparted
to Śrī Rāma by Vyāsa to show that all life is mere
illusion or different complexes of the mind. Śataru-
dropākhyāna is the story of a contemplative sannyāsin.
Whatever subject or object he conceived in his mind
used to assume its form as water changes into waves,
and it was a boon or great asset, which his heart had
acquired as a result of its purity. He confined himself
to his āśrama and thought about things one after the
other.
<div n="NI"/>To start with, Śatarudra thought to himself that he
was a ‘dream person’ called Jīvaṭa. While picnicking
in the streets of a ‘dream-built city’ the ‘dream person’
overcome by the effect of liquor remained in an
unconscious state for some time. He also felt imme-
diately to be a brahmin learned in the Vedas. ‘Jīvaṭa’,
who transformed himself thus into a brahmin slept
during day-time overcome by exhaustion on account
of work. At once he dreamt himself to have been
transformed into a feudal lord or tributary King, who,
after taking his meals went to sleep when he dreamt
that he was changed into a great King. The King,
who ruled the country peacefully changed himself one
day in dream into a celestial woman. The next dream
was that the woman, while in deep sleep after a
hilarious sexual act, was turned into a she-deer. The
she-deer, in dream turned into a creeper, and it duly
bore leaves, flowers and fruits. The creeper felt that it
[Page702-a+ 64]
entwined and climbed some trees. Then he (Jīvaṭa)
went into deep sleep, absolutely unaware of himself,
for some time. Then he dreamt himself to have chang-
ed into a beetle. The beetle felt attracted towards a
lotus flower and got captured therein. An elephant
from the forest nearby entered the ‘lotus pond’, plucked
and tore into pieces the lotus flower. As the beetle had
got fixed in its mind and imagination the picture of
the elephant it became a tusker elephant after its death.
While roaming about in the forest the elephant fell
into a deep pit and the King's men captured and listed
it in the army. A number of beetles gathered round
the elephant to suck its ichor (madajala). Because
it thought about the beetles the elephant, after its
death in battle, again became a beetle, which imagined
about the swan in the lotus-pond. The beetle one day
got captured in the lotus-flower and became a swan on
being killed by the elephant. Thus the beetle, after
taking many births and forms, became ultimately
Brahmā's vehicle, the swan. While the swan once
moved about the surrounding places of mount Kailāsa
it saw Rudra and imagining itself to be Rudra
(Rudroham—I am Rudra) attained Rudrahood.
While living happily with all the parapher-
nalia of Rudra he remembered his past lives, and
wondering about the many continuous dreams of his,
in solitude he thought like this:—“The power of
Māyā (illusion) which rules over everything in the
world is really wonderful. How curious and peculiar
is the cunningness or trickeries of Māyā in creating,
like mirage, the illusion that things, which did not
really exist, existed. Mistaking Māyā or mirage as the
truth and the fact, I roamed about in many a material
desert. In one form of life I was born as Jīvaṭa, in
another, King: in yet another, swan etc. and now I
have attained Rudra-hood. Hundred Caturyugas and
thousand years have passed in this ‘show” Now, I
will return and personally see all past episodes and I
shall identify them all with myself after bestowing
knowledge on them.
<div n="NI"/>Having made up his mind like this, Rudra descended
to the state of the old Sannyāsin. He infused life and
vitality into the dead body of the sannyāsin that was
there. The Sannyāsin remembered his old illusions
and hallucinations. He had attained Rudrahood after
crossing various stages from being Jīvaṭa. Then both
of them together came to the Jīvaṭa stage, awoke the
‘dream-person’ by giving him mind and vitality. After-
wards the three of them, who assumed single form by
the composition of different personalities, attained
various stages like brahmin etc., awoke them too and
added them to themselves (the three). Thus there came
about to be hundred persons formed from aspects or
fractions of Rudra, and at the instance of the real
Rudra they returned to their homes and lived there
happily with their sons, relations etc. Those hundred
persons are the Śatarudras. (Jñānavāsiṣṭha, Śatarudro-
pākhyāna). In Verse 13, Chapter 150 of Anuśāsana
Parva, Mahābhārata also is found references to the
Śatarudras.
<LEND>
