<L>6432<pc>703-a<k1>सात्विक<k2>सात्विक
SĀTVIKA¦. A brahmin, who was turned into a Rākṣasa
due to a curse after he had entered heaven. His story
[Page703-b+ 65]
has been told by sage Śaunaka to Bharata, brother of
Śrī Rāma.
<div n="NI"/>It was Bharata, who led the yājñic horse towards the
north in connection with the Aśvamedha yajña perform-
ed by Śrī Rāma after he was crowned King. The
horse, which started on its journey from Ayodhyā
reached, after six months, Hemakūṭa on the limits of
India. As soon as it got into a beautiful garden it was
rendered stationary as though paralysed. All attempts to
make the horse move failed. Śatrughna and some sol-
diers tried to lift the horse by its legs, to no purpose.
Hanūmān bound its legs with his tail and pulled, again
to no purpose, and surprised at this failure of his he
spoke to Śatrughna and others thus. “It was only just
now that I pulled out with my tail the Droṇa mountain
so very easily; but this small horse does not stir at all.
May be, it is all fate.” Following Hanūmān's speech,
Śatrughna asked Sumālī the explanation for this state of
the matter, but the latter could not find one for it. Then
it was decided to find out a maharṣi and ask him for
the explanation. The soldiers accompanied by Bharata
went in search of a maharṣi, reached Śaunaka's āśrama
and submitted the case to him.
<div n="NI"/>The maharṣi remained in meditation for some time and
the condition of the horse became vivid in his mind.
Then he spoke as follows:—“There was once a brahmin
named Sātvika in Gauḍa(?) land on the banks of river
Kāverī. Once he began performing tapas. He spent
three days. drinking only water the first day, consuming
air the next day and fasting completely the third day.
He continued his tapas repeating the above course until
one day he entered samādhi (expired). He got into
a decorated plane sent from Devaloka, went to the peak
of mount Meru and thence came to river Jambū, which
flowed from the great Jambū tree on the mountain.
There in Jambū were many maharṣis, who had acquired
merit by bathing in the golden water of the river, en-
joying all comforts in the company of apsarā women.
Sātvika, one day, haughty with the thought that he was
the master of the maharṣis, did something which quite
displeased the latter, and they cursed him. When he
prayed for absolution from the curse they told him thus:
“When you paralyse the feet of Śrī Rāma's horse, you
will happen to hear Rāma's story and then you will be
redeemed from curse.”
<div n="NI"/>On Śaunaka informing them thus that it was the
brahmin transformed into a Rākṣasa, who had para-
lysed the legs of the horse, Bharata returned to the
horse and recited the story of Rāma and immediately an
effulgent person came there in a plane and said, “Oh.
intelligent King! I have now heard the story of Rāma
and so have become pure; so, please let me go to
heaven.” After saying this he returned. Bharata and
others were pleased to know that the visitor was Sātvika
brahmin. The horse became free from its paralysed
condition. The party resumed its journey. (Padma
Purāṇa, Pātālakhaṇḍa, Chapters 47 and 48).
<LEND>
