<L>6454<pc>705-b<k1>सत्यकाम<k2>सत्यकाम
SATYAKĀMA¦ (SATYAKĀMA JĀBĀLA). A noble her-
mit. There is a story as given below, in the Chāndog-
yopaniṣad about the greatness of this hermit.
<div n="NI"/>As his father died in his boyhood, Satyakāma was
brought up by his mother Jābālī. Whan it was time to
begin education, the boy told his mother, “Mother, I
would like to be educated under a teacher, in the
Vedas. But I don's know what clan I belong to.
What answer shall I give, when the teacher asks me
about my clan?” His mother Jābālī replied. “I also
do not know much about the clan of your father who
married me when I was a girl. From that day onwards
I was engaged in house-keeping. I did not ask your
father about the clan. In my younger days I gave birth
to you. Shortly after that your father died. Tell your
teacher that you are Satyakāma the son of Jābālī.”
<div n="NI"/>Having heard this Satyakāma went in search of a
teacher. At last he reached the hermitage of the sage
Gautama and told him every thing. The hermit was
attracted by his truthfulness and behaviour. Believing
that Satyakāma was a Brahmin boy, Gautama accepted
him as a disciple. The hermit entrusted the boy with
four hundred lean cows to look after. The boy accepted
the work, and said to the hermit. “When this becomes
a group of thousand fat cows, I will bring them back.”
He lived in the forest looking after the cows. The Devas
[Page706-a+ 65]
sympathised with him. Vāyu (wind), the Sun, Agni
(fire) and Prāṇa together gave him divine knowledge and
wisdom. After this Satyakāma returned to the hermit
Gautama with thousand fat cows. Seeing the boy whose
face shone with the light of God, the hermit was
amazed. “Who gave you divine knowledge?” asked
the hermit. Satyakāma told the hermit all that took
place. Fully satisfied with the boy, Gautama imparted
to him knowledge about the universal Soul (Paramātmā)
and Satyakāma became a noble hermit.
<div n="NI"/>Satyakāma got several disciples of whom Upakosala
was prominent. He approached Satyakāma as a student.
For twelve years he served his teacher and kept up the
fire in the firepit for burnt offering, without being ex-
tinguished throughout the twelve years, and worshipped
the fire god. Yet the teacher did not impart knowledge
to him. The teacher's wife recommended to her hus-
band that Upakosala should be given learning. But the
teacher was silent. Upakosala took a vow and fast
before the burnt-offering fire pit. Agni Deva felt pity for
him and informed him that God is all-pervading and
that his teacher would show him the way to God. When
he came to the teacher, his face was seen shining.
Satyakāma asked Upakosala for the reason. Upakosala
told the teacher what the fire god had told him.
Immediately Satyakāma taught his disciple the path of
yoga (union) by knowledge of the Sāṅkhyas.
<LEND>
