<L>6475<pc>708-a<k1>सत्यतपस्<k2>सत्यतपस्
SATYATAPAS¦ (UTATHYA) I. A brahmin boy who was
changed into a cobra by the curse of a saint called
Godila. The original name of this youth was Utathya.
Later he came to be known as Satyatapas. The story of
this Śatyatapas is given in Devī Bhāgavata, Skandha 3,
as follows:-
<div n="NI"/>In days of old, there was a Brahmin named Devadatta
in Kosala. His wife was called Rohiṇī. Though much
time elapsed no child was born to them. At last Deva-
datta performed the sacrifice called Putrakāmeṣṭi, on the
banks of the river Tamasā. Several saintly persons
took part in the sacrifice. Suhotra was detailed as
Brahmā, Yājñavalkya as officiating priest, Bṛhaspati as
sacrificer, Paila to recite Vedas and Godila to sing Sāman
hymns. The singing of Godila, an expert singer, caused
horripilation to everybody in the sacrificial hall. But in
the middle of singing he had to take breath, and there
occurred a solecism in his voice. Devadatta did not like
it. He warned Godila, who instantly became angry and
said to Devadatta. “Since you called me Cobra, the son
born to you will become a cobra.”
[Page708-b+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>Devadatta became miserable and begged Godila by
holding his feet to pardon him. He gave liberation
from the curse that his son would be a cobra and
said that he would become a sage.
<div n="NI"/>The wife of Devadatta became pregnant and gave
birth to a son. He was named Utathya. In the
eighth year, the ceremony of investiture with the
Brahmā string was performed and the boy commenced
education. The teacher began to teach the Vedas.
From that day onwards the boy became self-conceited.
All the attempts made by the teacher to change his
behaviour were futile. His father tried the four ex-
pedients in vain. Thus twelve years elapsed. The
boy did not even learn the evening prayer. Everybody
thought that he was a cobra. All scoffed at him. His
own people disliked him; with this; self-renunciation
took root in his boyish mind and he left his home and
went away. He reached the banks of the Ganges and
made a hut there and lived there observing rigorous
celibacy, and vow of truth. Thus the boy-hermit
began severe penance.
<div n="NI"/>He had learned no rites or rituals according to the
Vedas. He would rise early in the morning, and after
cleaning the teeth he would take a dip in the Gangetic
waters, without any spells or actions and return to the
hut. He would eat anything that came by. He would
cause no harm to anybody, though he had no power to
do good to anybody. Everybody in the neighbourhood
began to realize that he was a boy who would on no
account utter falsehood. So all began to call him
Satyatapas. Satyatapas had no peace of mind. Life
seemed to be a burden to him. He became thoughtful
day and night. Thus he spent fourteen years there.
People firmly believed in his truthfulness. So they
named him Satyavrata. Once a forester came near his
hut. He sent an arrow at a hog, which ran into the
hermitage with the arrow sticking on its body. Blood
was oozing from its wound. The jungle-dweller also
came into the hut following the hog. Seeing Satya-
vrata the man asked “Where is the hog that I had
shot?” Satyavrata who knew that killing animals was a
sin, kept silence to save the beast. Devī was pleased
at the moral courage and truthfulness of Satyavrata. It
is said that the moment the hog got into the hermitage,
the Sārasvata syllable ‘Ai’ arose from the tongue of
Satyavrata. The moment he had pronounced the
root-sound of Sarasvatī, ‘Ai’, by the grace of Devī, he
became a poet like Vālmīki. Looking at the forester
Satyavrata said:
<Poem>“Yāḥ paśyati na sa brūte
Yo brūte sa na paśyati /
Aho! vyādha, svakāryārthin
Kam pṛcchasi punaḥ punaḥ //</Poem>
<div n="NI"/>“He who sees does not speak. He who speaks, does not
see. Selfish hunter, whom do you ask again and again?”
When the forester heard these words of Satyavrata, the
bow and arrow fell from his hands. With self-renun-
ciation he went away from the hermitage. The fame
of the great poet Satyavrata spread everywhere. His
father also heard about this from others. He came to
the bank of the Ganges and took his son home. Even
today Brahmins sing about the fame of that hermit on
the New moon days.
<LEND>
