<L>651<pc>078-b<k1>अवतार<k2>अवतार
AVATĀRA¦. (Incarnation). The incarnations of Mahā-
viṣṇu:—
<div n="NI"/>1) {%General information.%} God takes three kinds of incar-
nations such as avatāra, āveśa and aṃśa. That which
has full power is avatāra; that which has power only
for the time being is āveśa and partial incarnation in
aṃśāvatāra.
<F>*) See Aṃśāvatāra.</F> The incarnations of Viṣṇu are count-
less. Hermits, Manus, Devas (gods) and sons of Manus
are incarnations in part (aṃśāvatāras) of Viṣṇu. Com-
plete avatāras are ten in numbers of which Balabhadra
Rāma is not considered as an avatāra by some. In-
stead of him they place Buddha.
<div n="NI"/>{%b) Reason for the incarnations.%} Mahāviṣṇu has taken so
many incarnations in the world. In the Śrī Mahādevī
Bhāgavata a story occurs to the effect that Mahāviṣṇu
was forced to take so large a number of incarnations
due to the curse of the great hermit Bhṛgu. The story
is as follows: Kaśyapa had a son named Kaśipu. He
was daring and brave and ruled the country as an
enemy of the Gods. There arose a severe battle between
the gods and the Asuras. Kaśipu was killed in that
battle. After Kaśipu his son Prahlāda became King.
He too was an enemy of the Gods. So there was a
battle between Indra and Prahlāda. The battle conti-
nued for a hundred years. At last Prahlāda was defeat-
ed. He felt very sorry at the defeat. So he anointed
Bali, son of Virocana, as King and leaving the Kingdom
he went to the Gandhamādana and began to do
penance. The fight continued between Bali and Indra.
<div n="NI"/>In this fight Mahāviṣṇu helped Indra. The Asuras were
completely destroyed. The defeated Asuras went to
their teacher Śukra who promised to protect them by
spells and incantations and herbs. The Gods knew
that Śukra had undertaken to protect the asuras.
<div n="NI"/>Leaving the asuras behind, Śukra went to Kailāsa to
get more power of spells and incantations from Śiva.
Before going to Kailāsa Śukra had asked the Asuras
to wait for him with faith. After this the Asuras sent
Prahlāda to the Gods for a truce. Prahlāda, though an
Asura was in good favour with the Gods. He reached
the court of Indra and said, “Gods, we have no desire
at all for war. We have decided to spend the remain-
ing period in penance wearing barks of trees and tufts
of hair. How wicked a deed is battle and how delight-
ful it is to become a devotee of God! So hereafter you
will not be troubled by us. Likewise I hope you will
not do us innocent people any harm.”
<div n="NI"/>The gods believed Prahlāda. The Asuras, in the guise
of hermits waited for Śukra in the hermitage of Kaś-
yapa. Śukra reached Kailāsa and bowed before Śiva and
requested that he might be given the power of defeat-
ing the Gods by some means quite unknown to Bṛhas-
pati the teacher of the devas (Gods). Śiva was in
[Page079-a+ 65]
trouble. He could refuse neither Śukra nor the Gods.
At last he told hermit Śukra that to come by such a
spell he had to stand head downwards, inhaling smoke
for a thousand years. Śiva said so thinking that when
the dreadful nature of the feat was considered, Śukra
might desist from the attempt. But Śukra began that
penance instantly.
<div n="NI"/>The Gods understood everything. The deceit of the
Asuras, the crookedness of Śukra all were now clear to
them. They trembled with fear and began to consult
how to get over the difficult situation. Finally they
decided to go to war with the Asuras. The gods did
accordingly. The Asuras were in trouble. They were
not strong enough to face the Gods. So they all went
to Kāvyamātā, the mother of Śukra. The devas (gods)
with Mahāviṣṇu at their head chased the Asuras. Kāvya-
mātā, by the merits of her devotional meditation
petrified Mahāviṣṇu and Indra. Mahāviṣṇu thought of
his Sudarśana (wheel-weapon of Viṣṇu) which instant-
ly made its appearance and cut off the head of Kāvya-
mātā. The great hermit Bhṛgu got angry because Mahā-
viṣṇu committed woman-slaughter, and cursed him thus:
“You are a crooked being, a viper, a deceit. The
hermits who adore you as the seat of all that is good
are mere fools; you are wicked, of a black character,
and I curse you to take countless incarnations in the
world, and painful confinement by and by because of
your sins.” (Śrī Mahādevī Bhāgavata, 4th Skandha).
<div n="NI"/>Thus having cursed Viṣṇu, the hermit Bhṛgu took some
water from his water-pot and sprinkled it on the face of
Kāvyamātā, who woke up as if from sleep. (For the
remaining portion of the story see Śukra).
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Daśāvatāras. (The ten Incarnations).%} Owing to the curse
of Bhṛgu, mentioned above, Mahāviṣṇu had to under-
take so many incarnations, complete as well as partial.
Complete incarnations are ten in number. They are
called Daśāvatāras (The Ten Incarnations).
<Poem>Matsyaḥ Kūrmo Varāhaśca
Narasiṃhaśca Vāmanaḥ /
Rāmo Rāmaśca Rāmaśca
Kṛṣṇaḥ Kalkir janārdanaḥ // </Poem>
<div n="NI"/>Matsya (Fish), Kūrma (Turtle), Varāha (Pig), Nara-
siṃha (Lion-man), Vāmana (Dwarf), Rāma (Paraśu-
rāma), Rāma (Śrī Rāma), Rāma (Balabhadrarāma),
Kṛṣṇa (Śrī Kṛṣṇa), Kalki (Yet to come). These are
the ten incarnations of Janārdana.
<div n="NI"/>The daśāvatāras. are described one by one below.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Matsyāvatāra. (Fish Incarnation).%} To Kaśyapa, the
son of Marīci, and the grandson of Brahmā a son
was born, by his wife Aditi. He was called Vivasvān
and the Manu who was the son of Vivasvān is known
as Vaivasvata Manu or Satyavrata Manu. It was dur-
ing the time of this Manu that Viṣṇu incarnated as a
Matsya (fish).
<div n="NI"/>Once, while Brahmā was reciting the Vedas (the Scrip-
tures) Hayagrīva, an asura, stole the Vedas from the
side of Brahmā and with them he went under water to
the bottom of the ocean and hid himself there. So
Mahāviṣṇu decided to take the form of a fish to recover
the stolen Vedas.
<div n="NI"/>Vaivasvata Manu, the first and foremost of the godfear-
ing, was once doing penance in a place known as Badarī.
He got down into the river Kṛtamālā to take a bath.
Then a small fish said to the Manu: “Oh King, I am
afraid of large fishes. So please don't forsake me”. Hear-
[Page079-b+ 65]
ing this the Kind Manu took the fish in his hand and
put it in an earthenware pot and brought it up. In a
few days the fish began to grow. When the pot became
insufficient the King put it in a larger pot. When that
also became too small, the King put the fish in a pond.
When the pond could not hold the fish any longer the
King put it in the Ganges at its request. After a few days
the Ganges also became too small for the fish. Finally
the fish told the King: “Oh, King, within seven days
there will be a great flood in the world. You should
make a boat and take the seven hermit-sages with you
in the boat and escape. I will help you.”
<div n="NI"/>Hearing this he got an immensely large boat ready and
obeyed the instructions of the fish. Within seven days
rain started in torrents. Everything in the world, the
moving and the not moving, were under the flood. A
horn began to sprout from the head of the fish. Manu
tied his boat on that horn. The fish reached the summit
of the Himālayas with the boat, which was tied to the
highest peak. Since the peak came to be called ‘Nau-
bandhana Śṛṅga’ (The peak to which boat is tied).
The rain ceased to pour. It was seen that everything
in the world had been destroyed except the Manu and
the seven hermit-sages and some of the germs, saved
in the boat. (This story occurs in the great Hindi work
‘Kāmāyanī’ of Jayaśaṅkar Prasād). (M.B., Araṇya
Parva, Chapter 187; Agni Purāṇa, Chapter 2; Bhāgavata
8th Skandha, Chapter 24).
<div n="NI"/>This story of the incarnation of Viṣṇu as fish is seen in
the Bible figuratively. “In the order of the generations
of Adam, the first creation of God, Śeth, Enos; Kainān,
Mahalīl, Jāred, Enoch, Methūselah, Lamech and Noah
were born. When Noah was five hundred years old he
begot Shem, Ham and Japheth.
<div n="NI"/>There was a great flood during the time of Noah. God
said to him: “The end of all flesh is come before one;
for the earth is filled with violence through them, and
behold, I will destroy them with the earth. Make thee
an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the
ark and shalt paint it within and without with pitch.
And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of. The
length of the ark should be three hundred cubits, the
breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty
cubits. A window shalt thou make to the ark and in a
cubit shall thou finish it above and the door of the ark
shalt thou set in the side thereof, with lower, second and
third stories shalt thou make it. And behold, I, even I,
do bring a flood of water up on the earth. to destroy all
flesh wherein is the breadth of life from under heaven
and everything that is in the earth shall die. But with
thee will I establish my covenant, and thou shalt come
into the ark, thou and thy sons and thy wife and thy
sons' wives with thee, and of every living thing of all
flesh, two of every sort, shalt thou bring into the ark to
keep them alive with thee; they shall be male and fe-
male. Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after
their kind, and of every creeping thing of the earth
after their kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee
to keep them alive. And take thou unto thee of all food
that is eaten and thou shalt gather it to thee, and it
shall be for food for thee and for them.” Thus did Noah
according to all that God commanded him, so did he.
<div n="NI"/>And the Lord said unto Noah, “Come thou and all thy
house into the ark, for thee Have I seen righteous be-
fore me in this generation. Of every clean beast thou
[Page080-a+ 65]
shalt take to thee by sevens the male and his female
and of beasts that are not clean by two the male and
his female. Of fowls also of the air by sevens the male
and the female to keep seed alive up on the face of all
the earth. For yet seven days and I will cause it to rain
up on the earth forty days and forty nights, and every
living substance that I have made will I destroy from
off the earth.” And Noah did according unto all that
the Lord commanded him.
<div n="NI"/>And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of
waters was up on the earth. And Noah went in, and
his sons and his wife and his sons' wives with him into
the ark because of the waters of the flood. Of clean
beasts and of beasts that are not clean and of fowls and
of everything that creepeth upon the earth. There went
in two and two unto Noah into the ark the male and
the female as God had commanded Noah. And it came
to pass after seven days that the waters of the flood were
upon the earth. In the six hundredth year of Noah's
life in the second month on the seventeenth day of the
month the same day were all the fountains of the
great deep broken up and the windows of heaven were
opened and the rain was up on the earth for forty
days and forty nights. In the self-same day entered
Noah and Shem, and Ham and Japheth the sons of
Noah and Noah's wife and the wives of the sons
with them into the ark. They and every beast after
his kind and all the cattle after their kind and
every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth
and every fowl after his earth after his kind, every
bird of every sort. And they went in unto Noah
into the ark, two and two of all flesh wherein is the
breadth of life. And they that went in, went in male
and female of all flesh as God had commanded him
and the Lord shut him in. And the flood was forty days
upon the earth, and the waters increased and bore up
the ark and it was lifted up above the earth. And the
waters prevailed and were increased greatly upon the
earth and the ark went up on the face of the waters.
And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth
and all the high hills that were under the whole heaven
were covered. Fifteen cubits upward did the waters
prevail and the mountains were covered. And all the
flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl and
of cattle and of beast and of every creeping thing that
creepeth up on the earth, and every man. All in whose
nostrils was the breadth of life, of all that was in the
dry land, died. And every living substance was des-
troyed which was up on the face of the ground both
man and cattle and the creeping things and the fowl
of the heaven, and they were destroyed from the earth.
And Noah only remained alive, and they that were
with him in the ark. And the waters prevailed upon
the earth for hundred and fifty days.
<div n="NI"/>And God remembered Noah and every living thing
and all the cattle that was with him in the ark and
God made a wind to pass over the earth and the
waters became calm. The fountains also of the deep
and the windows of heaven were stopped and the rain
from heaven was restrained. And the waters returned
from off the earth continually and after the end of the
hundred and fifty days, the waters were abated. And the
ark rested in the seventh month on the seventeenth day
of the month upon the mountains of Arārat. And the
waters decreased continually until the tenth month.
[Page080-b+ 65]
In the tenth month on the first day of the month
were the tops of the mountains seen. And it came to
pass at the end of forty days that Noah opened the
window of the ark which he had made. And he sent
forth a raven which went forth to and fro until the waters
were dried up from off the earth. Also he sent forth
a dove from him to see if the waters were abated
from off the face of the ground. But the dove found
no rest for the sole of her foot and she returned
unto him into the ark for the waters were on
the face of the whole earth. Then Noah put forth
his hand and took her and pulled her to the ark. And
he stayed yet other seven days. And again he sent
forth the dove out of the ark. And the dove came
in to him in the evening, and lo, in her mouth
was an olive leaf plucked off. So Noah knew that
the waters were abated from off the earth. And he
stayed yet other seven days and sent forth the dove,
which returned not again unto him anymore. And it
came to pass in the six hundredth and first year in the
first month, the first day of the month the waters were
dried up from off the earth and Noah removed the
covering of the ark and looked and beheld the face of
the ground was dry. And in the second month on the
seven and twentieth day of the month was the earth
dried. And God spake unto Noah saying: “Go forth of
the ark, thou and thy wife, and thy sons and thy sons'
wives with thee. Bring forth with thee every living thing
that is with thee, of all flesh both of fowl and of cattle and
of every creeping thing that creepeth up on the earth,
that they may breed abundantly in the earth and be
fruitful and multiply up on the earth. And Noah went
forth and his sons and his wife and his sons' wives
with him. Every beast, every creeping thing and every
fowl and whatsoever creep up on the earth after their
kinds went forth out of the ark. And Noah built an
altar unto the Lord and took of every clean beast and
of every clean fowl and offered burnt offerings on the
altar. And the Lord smelt a sweet savour and the Lord
said in his heart: “I will not again curse the ground
anymore for man's sake. For the imagination of man's
heart is evil from his youth. Neither will I again smite
anymore every thing as I have done. While the earth
remaineth seed time and harvest and cold and heat
and summer and winter and day and night shall not
cease. (Holy Bible, Genesis, Chapters 6, 7 and 8).
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Kūrmāvatāra. (Incarnation as a tortoise).%} Long ago
when Durvāsas visited the realm of Gods he presented
Devendra with a garland made of flowers of exquisite
fragrance. Indra tied it on to the tusk of Airāvata (the
elephant of Indra). When the beetles which gathered
on the garland for honey became a nuisance, Airā-
vata destroyed that garland. Durvāsas who got angry
at this cursed the gods as a whole that they would get
wrinkles and grey hair. The gods were advised by
Mahāviṣṇu that if they got Ambrosia (Amṛta—celestial
honey) from the sea of Milk by churning it they could
escape from this. Accordingly the Gods called the
asuras for help, and they approached the sea of Milk.
They made use of the Mountain of Mandara as churn-
drill and the huge snake Vāsuki as churning rope, and
the churning commenced. The gods took hold of the
tail of the snake and as the churning was proceeding
the churn-drill, the mountain of Mandara, having no
fixation at the bottom sank down. Then Mahāviṣṇu
[Page081-a+ 65]
took the form of a turtle, and got under the Mandara
mountain and lifted it up on his back. By the force of
lifting it went higher and higher up. Then Mahāviṣṇu took
the form of an eagle and sat on the top of the mountain
and it came down a little and placed itself in the right
position. (Bhāgavata, Skandha 8, Chapter 7; Agni
Purāṇa, Chapter 3; Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, Bālakāṇḍa,
Sarga 45).
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Varāhāvatāra. (Incarnation as a Pig).%} Jaya and Vijaya
were the two watchers who stood at the gate of Mahā-
viṣṇu. Once the great hermit-sages Sanaka and others
reached Vaikuṇṭha to visit Mahāviṣṇu. Then Jaya and
Vijaya treated the hermits without respect. The hermits
cursed them that they would become Dānavas (Asuras
or giants). They also said that when they were slain
thrice by Mahāviṣṇu they would reach heaven. At
that period when hermit Kaśyapa was carrying on
his evening prayer and devotional rites, his wife Diti
approached him with lustful desire. Kaśyapa told her
that as he was engaged in prayer and meditation it
was not proper on her part to select that particular
moment for her lustful desire. But she persisted and
the sage yielded and out of that union two sons were
born. They are the two asuras Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇya-
kaśipu. Of these Hiraṇyākṣa was the incarnation of
Jaya and Hiraṇyakaśipu that of Vijaya.
<F>*) During their next birth they made their appearance as Rāvnca and Kumbhakarṇa and during the third birth they were Śiśupāla and
Daṇḍavaktra.</F> With the
birth of these two the whole world began to tremble.
These two asura brothers began to terrorize the world.
They wandered about causing destruction and devasta-
tion wherever they went. Once Hiraṇyākṣa got down
into the ocean and began to beat the waves in the
ocean with his cudgel. The ocean began to sway and
surge. Varuṇa (the Lord of water) was terrified and
he ran to Mahāviṣṇu and sought protection. Mahā-
viṣṇu took the form of a Pig and came to the ocean.
When Hiraṇyākṣa saw Mahāviṣṇu he took the earth in
his hand and ran to Pātāla (the nether world). Mahā-
viṣṇu followed him and killed him and recovered the
earth. (Bhāgavata, Skandha 3, Chapter 18; Bhāgavata,
Skandha 2, Chapter 7 and Agni Purāṇa, Chapter 4).
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Narasiṃhāvatāra. (Incarnation as lion-man).%} With the
death of Hiraṇyākṣa, his brother Hiraṇyakaśipu became
furious more than ever. He wanted to avenge the death
of his brother. His fury was turned towards Mahāviṣṇu.
So he got on the top of the Mountain of Mandara and
did penance before Brahmā and Brahmā appeared and
granted him boons, one of which was that nobody but
Viṣṇu should be able to kill him. He returned with
gladness and began to roam about torturing devotees
of Viṣṇu everywhere.
<div n="NI"/>A son named Prahlāda was born to him. He was a god-
fearing child and from birth an ardent believer in Viṣṇu.
Hiraṇyakaśipu tried his utmost to change his son to a
hater of Viṣṇu. He got a special teacher for the
purpose and Prahlāda was taken to the house of the
teacher to live with him until he changed his mind. The
result was that the teacher and all others who advised
him ultimately became believers in Viṣṇu. Anger over-
powered Hiraṇyakaśipu. Prahlāda was thrown before
mad elephants. But the tusks of the elephant missed the
aim and were driven into the earth and broken. Veno-
mous snakes were employed and those which bit him had
their fangs broken. Finally the child was put in blazing
[Page081-b+ 63]
fire. But the child felt the fire to be cool and soothing.
From that fire a ghost arose and tried to kill Prahlāda.
Instantly the Sudarśana, the wheel-weapon of Viṣṇu
came down and cut off the head of the ghost. Hiraṇya-
kaśipu jumped with anger and called out. “Where
is your Viṣṇu?” His son replied that his Viṣṇu dwelt
in every movable and immovable thing. Hiraṇyakaśipu
kicked at a stone pillar close by and asked him, “Is
your Viṣṇu in this pillar?” Prahlāda replied, “My Viṣṇu
is in Pillar and in fibre”. Before he had finished, the
Pillar broke open and a monster as horrible as the
Destroyer Śiva, in the shape of a lion-man made its
appearance.
<Poem>“Mīmāṃsamānasya samuthito 'grato
Nṛsiṃharūpastadalaṃ bhayānakaṃ
Prataptacāmīkaracaṇḍalocanaṃ
Sphuratsaṭākesarajṛmbhitānanaṃ
Karāladaṃṣṭraṃ Karavālacañcala-
Kṣurāntajihvaṃ bhrukuṭimukholbaṇaṃ
Stabdhordhvakarṇam girikandarādbhuta-
vyāttāsyanāsaṃhanubhedabhīṣaṇaṃ
Divispṛśatkāyamadīrghapīvara-
Grīvoruvakṣaḥsthalamalpamadhyamaṃ
Candrāṃśugauraiśchuritaṃ tanūruhai-
ṛviṣvagbhujānīkaśataṃ nakhāyudham.”</Poem>
<div n="NI"/>“Before him who was waiting with curiosity to see what
would happen, with eyes blazing as molten gold, mouth
wide open in the middle of long bushy mane, tusks
long and curved and protruding fearfully, tongue sway-
ing like a sword, eyebrows fierce looking, ears standing
erect and still, two nostrils as wide and deep as moun-
tain canyons, jaws prominent and thick and broad and
set with fierceness, colossal body reaching the sky, neck
very thick and fat and short, breast excessively broad
and strong, waist very small and narrow, body thickly
covered with bushy hair exuberantly grown and as
yellow as the light of the moon, a number of claws very
sharp and pointed, the horrid monster Narasiṃha
(Lion with human head) suddenly appeared. (Bhāga-
vata, Skandha 7, Chapter 8, Stanzas 20-22).
<div n="NI"/>This was the figure of Narasiṃha. Mr. S. Paramesvara
Iyer, Ulloor, has described this figure in his “Bhakti-
dīpikā” as follows:
<div n="NI"/>“Glaring eyes burning as blazing cinder, tongue as a
dagger just used in piercing to death, neck with folds,
eyebrows looking mad, tusks like young moon, fierce
face with bushy mane grown to it, hair long and sharp
like pointed wire, claws looking like having drunk blood,
body shining as if countless suns had risen together, all
combined as if the fire of anger burning inside had
incarnated, in the shape of a lion up to neck and
human shape beyond the neck.” (Bhaktidīpikā)
<div n="NI"/>The horrid monster caught hold of Hiraṇyakaśipu the
King of the Asuras, pushed him to the ground and
opened his heart with its fierce claws. Blood sprouted
like a spring. With great ferocity he pulled out the in-
testines of Hiraṇyakaśipu and wore them round his
neck as a garland and roared loudly. Prahlāda, with
songs of praise and chanting of hymns of adoration
pacified the stormy Narasiṃha and bowed low down
before him. The Narasiṃha was pleased with the devo-
tion of Prahlāda. He blessed the child and then dis-
appeared. (Bhāgavata, Skandha 7, Chapter 8).
[Page082-a+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>5) {%Vāmanāvatāra. (Incarnation as a Dwarf).%} It was to ex-
pel the Emperor Mahābali, that Mahāviṣṇu incarnat-
ed as a dwarf. To Kaśyapa, the son of Marīci and
the grandson of Brahmā, was born of Diti, Hiraṇya-
kaśipu. And from Prahlāda the son of Hiraṇyakaśipu
was born Virocana and Bali was the son of Virocana.
Bali got the name Mahābali because of his prowess.
He was the emperor of the Asuras. A fierce battle
began over the Ambrosia got from churning the sea
of Milk, between the Asuras and the gods. In the battle
Indra cut Mahābali down with his Vajrāyudha. The
Asuras took the body of Mahābali to Pātāla (the
nether world) where their teacher Śukra brought him to
life again. Then Mahābali worshipped the Bhārgavas
and became more powerful than before and went to
heaven again and renewed the battle. This time he
defeated the Gods altogether and subjugated the realm
of the Gods who were scattered to all sides. The devas
or gods are the sons of Kaśyapa born by his wife, Aditi.
She felt very sorry at the defeat of the gods. Seeing that
she was silent and sad Kaśyapa asked her the reason.
She replied that she was thinking of ways to enable the
gods to recover their lost power and position. Kaśyapa
advised her to please Mahāviṣṇu by observing Dvā-
daśī vrata (fast of the twelfth lunar night). Aditi did
so and Viṣṇu appeared before her and asked her what
she desired. Her request was that Viṣṇu should take
birth in her womb and recover Indra to his lost power
and position. Thus Viṣṇu took birth as the younger
brother of Indra in the shape of Vāmana (dwarf.)
<div n="NI"/>At this time Emperor Mahābali was celebrating a sacri-
fice on the bank of the River Narmadā after having
subjugated the whole of the world. A large number of
hermits gathered there. Vāmana also was among them.
He requested Mahābali to grant him three feet of
ground as alms. The teacher Śukra warned Mahābali
against granting the request. But the emperor granted
the request and asked Vāmana to measure the ground.
Vāmana immediately enlarged his body and measured
the heaven, the earth and the Pātāla (the upper realm,
the earth and the lower realm) in two steps and asked
for place for the third step. The honest Mahābali
showed his head and requested to complete the three
steps. Vāmana put his step on the head of Mahābali and
pushed him down to Pātāla. Thus the gods regained
their lost places. (Bhāgavata, Skandha 8, Chapter 19).
A description that by the toe of Vāmanas' raised foot
(raised for measuring the third step) the testicle of
Brahmā was cut open where from the Ganges originated,
is seen in the Bhāgavata, Skandha 5.
<div n="NI"/>When Viśvāmitra took Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa to the
forest they entered a holy hermitage and Viśvāmitra
told the boys that it was the hermitage where Aditi,
long ago had observed dvādaśī fast. It was in that same
place that Vāmana incarnated and placed his step on
the head of Mahābali.
<div n="NI"/>“The bright Mādhava took birth in Aditi as Vāmana
and went to Mahābali, requested for three feet of ground
and brought under control the three worlds for the good
of all. By binding Bali by might, he gave to Indra the
three worlds and this hermitage is the place where He
once placed his steps. I am a devotee of that Vāmana.”
(Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, Bāla Kāṇḍa, Sarga 29).
<div n="NI"/>6) {%Paraśurāmāvatāra. (Incarnation as Paraśurāma).%} Once
Kārttavīryārjuna pleased the hermit-sage Dattātreya
[Page082-b+ 63]
the son of Atri, by doing penance and got the boon of
one thousand hands. One day he went to the forest for
hunting and entered the bank of Narmadā. The hermit
Jamadagni had been living there with his wife Reṇukā
and sons Paraśurāma and others. The King being tired
of hunting got into the hermitage. Paraśurāma was not
there. The hermit called his divine cow Kāmadhenu,
which provided the King and his followers with a very
good supper.
<div n="NI"/>When the King departed he asked for the wonderful
cow. The hermit did not consent. The King caught
hold of the cow by force and went to his city. Paraśu-
rāma went to Māhiṣmatīnagar the capital of Kārtta-
vīryārjuna, killed the King and took Kāmadhenu back.
From that day onwards the sons of Kārttavīrya were
waiting for an opportunity to take revenge.
<div n="NI"/>Once Reṇukā went to the river to bring water. A gan-
dharva (semi god) named Citraratha was bathing in
the river. She happened to look at him for a little while.
When she returned the hermit was very angry and asked
each of his sons to cut off the head of their mother. They
all refused. But Paraśurāma immediately obeyed his
father and cut off her head. His father was pleased and
said that he might ask any boon. He requested his father
to bring his mother back to life. Accordingly Reṇukā
was brought back to life.
<div n="NI"/>Once the sons of Kārttavīrya got into the hermitage,
at a time when Paraśurāma was away and cut off the
head of the hermit Jamadagni and took it off. When he
returned his mother told him how his father was killed.
She cried and beat her breast twentyone times. Paraśu-
rāma became an incarnation of revenge, and travelled
over the world twentyone times and killed every Kṣat-
riya King. The blood of all those Kings flowed into one
channel and gathered in a holy Bath called Syamanta-
pañcakaṃ. Thus Mahāviṣṇu took his sixth incarna-
tion as Paraśurāma and fulfilled his duty of destroying
the wicked Kṣatriya Kings (For details about Paraśu-
rāma see under Paraśurāma and Kārttavīryārjuna).
(Bhāgavata, Skandha 9, Chapter 16).
<div n="NI"/>7) {%Śrī Rāmāvatāra.%} Mahāviṣṇu took the incarnation of
Śrī Rāma to kill Rāvaṇa. (For further information see
the words Śrī Rāma and Rāvaṇa).
<div n="NI"/>8) {%Balabhadrarāmāvatāra.%} (The incarnation of Bala-
bhadrarāma) (See the word Balabhadrarāma).
<div n="NI"/>9) {%Śrī Kṛṣṇāvatāra.%} (The incarnation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa) (See
the word Kṛṣṇa).
<div n="NI"/>10) {%Kalkyavatāra (The incarnation as Kalki).%} At the end
of Kaliyuga (the Age of Kali) all the people would
become atheists and sceptics. Rewards will be received
from the depraved. The classes will be mixed. People
would become degenerate having no good qualities. A
religion called ‘Vājasaneyam’ with its fifteen doctrines
only will be acceptable. People would become irrespon-
sible wearing the garment of duty. Lawless people
would take the form of Kings and will begin to eat
men. In those days Lord Viṣṇu will incarnate as Kalki,
the son of Viṣṇuyaśas and the priest of Yājñavalkya and
learn the arts of wielding weapon and handling missiles
and destroy all lawless ones. The subjects will be
brought back to the four classes and the four āśramas
or stages of life and the doctrines and directions of the
long-established religion and peace and order will be
[Page083-a+ 64]
restored. Then the Lord will cast away the form of
Kalki and go to heaven. After that, as of old, Kṛtayuga
(the first age) will begin class distinctions and the four
stages of life and such other establishments will once
more prevail. (Agni Purāṇa, Chapter 16).
<div n="NI"/>3) {%The Incarnations of Mahāviṣṇu.%}
<div n="NI"/>It is mentioned in Śrī Mahādevī Bhāgavata, Skandha 1,
Chapter 3 that Mahāviṣṇu had taken the twentysix
incarnations given below:
<div n="NI"/>1) Sanaka 2) Sananda 3) Sanātana 4) Sanatkumāra
5) Varāha (pig) 6) Nārada 7) Nara Nārāyaṇas 8)
Kapila 9) Dattātreya 10) Yajña 11) Ṛṣabha 12) Pṛthu
13) Matsya (fish) 14) Mohinī 15) Kūrma (turtle)
16) Garuḍa (eagle) 17) Dhanvantari 18) Narasiṃha
(Lion-man) 19) Vāmana (dwarf) 20) Paraśurāma
21) Vyāsa 22) Śrī Rāma 23) Balabhadrarāma 24)
Śrī Kṛṣṇa 25) Buddha 26) Kalki. (Information about
Matsya, Kūrma, Varāha, Narasiṃha, Vāmana and
Paraśurāma, are given under the word Avatāra and
for the rest see the same words).
<div n="NI"/>In the first Skandha of “Bhāgavata Kilippattu” the
incarnations are exhaustively dealt with as follows:
<div n="NI"/>“And after that to make it possible for the Lord with
four faces to rule his subjects justly and well. He took
various incarnations with his portions, the first four of
which are four persons, Sanaka, Sananda, Sanātana and
Sanatkumāra, in the order given, four or five-year old
children, well-versed in the four Vedas, the four always
inseparable wandered everywhere come to the world
to show the merits of Brahmacarya (the vow of celi-
bacy). To kill Hiraṇyākṣa and to lift up the earth He
took the form of Sūkara (Pig). To show the world the
tattva (essence) of Sat (good) and tama (darkness)
He took the form of hermit Nārada. To show the merits
of penance He became Nara and Nārāyaṇa. To impart
to the world the meaning of Sāṃkhya Yoga (Indian
Philosophy dealing with evolution and union with the
Supreme Spirit) He came as Kapila the learned. To
teach the world the laws of chastisement He was
born as Datta of the wife of Atri. Then He came as
Yajña to become Indra. The next incarnation He took
was Ṛṣabha, the noble King. To shorten and flatten
the earth He came as Pṛthu. To recover the Vedas he
took the form of Matsya (fish). To remove wrinkles and
grey hair the gods had churned the sea of Milk and
then to lift the mount Mandara He went under it and
as a bird He got up on it. To give the world Āyurveda
(the scripture of medicine) He came as Dhanvantari.
To entice Asuras and to recover Ambrosia from them
He took the form of Mohinī. To save the devoted
Prahlāda and to slay his father He came in the form of
Narasiṃha. Then as Vāmana the younger brother of
Indra to deceive Mahābali and to recover the lost worlds
for the gods he came. To destroy the Kings who were
haters of Brahmins He came as the son of Jama-
dagni. Then he took the incarnation of Veda Vyāsa.
And to slay the giant Rāvaṇa He became Śrī Rāma.
Next we see Him as Balabhadrarāma. Then He came
as Devakīsuta [son of Devakī (Kṛṣṇa)]. Next He came
in the Kaliyuga as Śrī Buddha and at the end of Kali-
yuga He will come as Kalki. And there are many in-
carnations still to speak of.”
<LEND>
