<L>6658<pc>731-b<k1>शिवशर्मन्<k2>शिवशर्मन्
ŚIVAŚARMAN¦. A brahmin well-versed in all śāstras
(sciences). Śivaśarman, who lived in Dvārakā had, by
his wife Guṇavatī five sons called Yajñaśarman, Veda-
śarman, Dharmaśarman, Viṣṇuśarman and Somaśar-
man, all of them deeply devoted to their father. The
father decided to test the devotion of each of the sons.
[Page732-a+ 65]
Śivaśarman had, due to Śiva's blessing, achieved all
kinds of siddhis (spiritual gifts). By the power of illusion
he showed the sons their mother lying dead and all the
sons wept uncontrollably. Then he asked his eldest son
Yajñaśarman, to cut the dead body of his mother into
pieces and throw them off. After having done so he came
and saluted his father.
<div n="NI"/>After bidding adieu to Yajñaśarman, who proved his devo-
tion to his father as above, Śivaśarman called his second
son Vedaśarman to him and told him thus: “I find it
difficult to get on without a woman. Look, there is a
beautiful woman there endowed with all qualifications.
(And he created such a woman by illusion). You go and
fetch her to me.” Vedaśarman, after saluting his father
went to the woman and requested her to become the
wife of his father. But, the woman did not want to
become the wife of an old man, and she told Vedaśar-
man that she would love him, and not his father, to
have as her husband. He shuddered to be told thus,
and by the power of his tapas he got down Indra and
other Devas on earth and showed them to her. She
then told him in indifferent tone the following: “Yes, I
have seen the prowess of your tapas. But, I have nothing
to do with Devas. If you want me as wife for your
father, please cut off your head with your own hands
for my pleasure.” Vedaśarman drew his sword and
very happily cut off his head and presented it to the
woman. She came to Śivaśarman and requested him to
accept his son's head, which he (son) had voluntarily cut
off for the sake of his father.
<div n="NI"/>The other sons of Śivaśarman shuddered at the sight of
their brother's head. They told among themselves thus:
“Our mother entered eternal Samādhi, but this brother
of ours, who courted death on behalf of father is really
blessed.” Then Śivaśarman asked his third son Dharma-
śarman to receive his brother's head. He received it
and went out with it and prayed to Dharmadeva, who,
on his appearance, was requested to restore Vedaśarman
to life. Dharmadeva did so, and the first question
asked by Vedaśarman, who returned to life as though
awakened from sleep, was about the woman, whom he
had brought as his father's wife. Then Vedaśarman
and Dharmaśarman returned to their father, and Dharma-
śarman told the father about his bringing back to life
his dead brother. Though the father felt very happy
about the great devotion of his son he did not answer
him (son).
<div n="NI"/>Śivaśarman fell into contemplation for sometime and
then told his fourth son, Viṣṇuśarman as follows: “You
go immediately to Indraloka and bring amṛta (nectar)
for me to drink along with this woman. Nectar removes
diseases. Now, this woman has no interest in me. It is
only natural that young, beautiful women will feel no
love towards an old man and unless I regain my youth
this woman of mine may sleep with others. You, my son,
should act in such a manner that I can enjoy life with
this woman in all the three worlds.
<div n="NI"/>As soon as he heard his father, Viṣṇuśarman, by the
power of his tapas ascended to the sky and started for
Indraloka. Being told about the object of his visit Indra
deputed Menakā to make him withdraw from the plan.
Immediately Menakā put on her best clothes and sing-
ing sweet music occupied the hanging seat in Nanda-
navana, and Viṣṇu arman lost not a minute to divine
the object of her presence. Without even casting a look
[Page732-b+ 65]
upon her, he hurried forward. But, she jumped down
from her seat, blocked his path and made enquiries
about him. She also tried to make love to him. But,
Viṣṇuśarman turned down her overtures of love. At
this stage Indra adopted many magical tricks to frighten
away the unwelcome visitor. Angered by such attempts
Viṣṇuśarman got ready to destroy Devaloka along with
Indra, who then begged pardon of him and handed
over to him a pot full of nectar.
<div n="NI"/>When Viṣṇuśarman gave the nectar to his father the
latter asked him to choose any boon he wanted, and
according to his request the father brought back to life
Guṇavatī. Now Śivaśarman very much pleased with his
sons sent the first four of them to Viṣṇuloka. He decided
to live for some time more on earth with his youngest son,
and he told the latter that he was going on a pilgrimage
and asked him to keep the pot of nectar with him. The
son kept it very carefully for ten years. Now Śivaśarman
with his wife returned from pilgrimage. By magic he
had become a leper, and made his wife also a leper.
Somaśarman, his youngest son felt pained that his
parents had fallen victims to such a fell disease and
served them with meticulous care in every way. He
foresaw their wants and desires and satisfied them to the
full. Yet, the father lost temper with the son and used
even to fist him. But, the son did not lose his temper
in any manner and to the least degree. He continued
to serve his parents most cheerfully.
<div n="NI"/>A century was over in this manner. The parents were
greatly satisfied and pleased with their son, and ulti-
mately the father cast one more illusion on the son.
After stealing away by magic the nectar from the pot,
he asked the son for it. When Somaśarman looked into
the pot for nectar, to his horror it was missing. But, he
took the pot to his father saying to himself, ‘Let there
be nectar in it if I am truthful, if I have served my
elders well and if I have observed pure tapas’, and lo!
the pot was filled with nectar.
<div n="NI"/>Śivaśarman blessed his son, and by the power of his
yoga ascended to Vaikuṇṭha in the company of his wife.
After this Somaśarman began practising the most in-
tense form of tapas. When the time for his death was
near asuras approached him. Fear about asuras gripped
him, who was in deep meditation, and as he breathed
his last thinking about asuras he was born in his next
life as Prahlāda, son of Hiraṇyakaśipu and got killed by
Viṣṇu in the war between Devas and Asuras. (Padma
Purāṇa, Bhūmi Khaṇḍa).
<LEND>
