<L>6727<pc>735-b<k1>श्रीदत्त<k2>श्रीदत्त
ŚRĪDATTA¦. Son of Kālanemi a Brāhmaṇa of Mālava
land. Kālanemi and Vigatabhaya were the sons of
a Brāhmaṇa named Yajñasena. After the death of
their father they went to Pāṭalīputra for education.
The teacher gave his two daughters in marriage to
them. By the blessing of goddess Lakṣmī, Kālanemi
became rich in course of time and he was also blessed
with a glorious son. Since he was given by the
blessing of Lakṣmī (Śrī) he was named Śrīdatta.
<div n="NI"/>Śrīdatta grew up and became an expert in archery.
Kālanemi's younger brother, Vigatabhaya left home
and went on a pilgrimage after his wife's death by
snake-bite. Kālanemi's king, Vallabhaśakti was pleased
with Śrīdatta and invited him to live in the palace.
In this way, he became the intimate friend of the
king's son, Vikrama Śakti. After that, Bāhuśāli and
Vajramuṣṭi, the princes of Avantī became the friends
of Śrīdatta. Mahābala, Vyāghrabhaṭa, Upendrabala
and Niṣṭhūraka, who were the Minister's sons, also
sought the protection of Śrīdatta.
<div n="NI"/>One day, Śrīdatta along with Vikramaśakti and other
companions went to bathe to the banks of the Gaṅgā.
While they were there, the party of friends began to
engage in some amusements. Śrīdatta assumed the role
of a king and the others posed as his subjects.
Vikramaśakti, the king's son, could not tolerate it. He
challenged Śrīdatta for a fight. In the fight Vikrama-
śakti was defeated. But he secretly resolved to kill
Śrīdatta by hook or by crook. Srīdatta understood his
secret plan.
<div n="NI"/>After leaving Vikramaśakti, Śrīdatta was walking with
the others along the river-bank when he saw a woman
struggling for life because she was caught in a whirlpool
in the middle of the river. Śrīdatta at once left his
companions and jumped into the river and swam up
to her. When he was almost within reach of her hair
the woman sank into the water. Śrīdatta also sank and
followed her, but after some time, he found neither the
woman nor even water. He found himself in a Śiva
temple. He offered worship there and took rest in a
park close by. The next morning a woman came to
worship in the temple. When she returned after
worship, Śrīdatta followed her. The woman who was
alarmed, walked faster and at last reached a heavenly
abode. She entered the house and took her seat on a
cot inside. Śrīdatta also got in and sat near the cot.
Many other women came and stood around her.
Without any apparent reason she began to cry. Śrīdatta
who was puzzled, asked her why she was crying. She
replied to him in the following words:—
<div n="NI"/>“I am the grand-daughter of the Asura king, Mahābali.
I am the eldest of his one thousand grand-daughters.
My name is ‘Vidyutprabhā’. Viṣṇu has captured and
imprisoned our grandfather, Mahābali. He has also
killed our father in battle. After that he has expelled
us all from our Capital city. To prevent us from
entering it again, he has posted a lion as sentry
[Page736-a+ 65]
at the palace gate. That lion is a Yakṣa who was cursed
by Kubera. If any one defeats him, he would be libe-
rated from his curse. By defeating that lion, you will
get a divine sword. With that you can defeat anyone.”
As soon as he heard this story, Śrīdatta rushed towards
the lion. In the fight that followed, the lion was de-
feated and it was suddenly transformed into the old
Yaksa. Pleased with the hero who was instrumental in
lifting his curse, he gave Śrīdatta a sword called “Mrgāṅ-
kaka” and then disappeared. Vidyutprabhā entered the
palace, accompanied by her sisters and Śrīdatta. She
gave a ring to Śrīdatta which had the power to destroy
the effects of poison. She fell in love with him. She
asked him to take a bath in the tank close by after giving
the sword to her, and undertook to kill any crocodile
which might attack him. Śrīdatta, keeping the sword
in his own hand, stepped into the water and sank into
it. But he rose up in the river Gaṅgā into which he
had jumped earlier. He reached the bank of the river
and went in search of his companions. On the way, he
met with Niṣṭhūraka. In the course of their talk,
Niṣṭhūraka informed Śrīdatta that, Vallabhaśakti passed
away and Vikramaśakti was then ruling over the coun-
try. The new king had killed Kālanemi and was on
the look-out for murdering Śrīdatta. Both of them
resumed their journey and when they reached Ujjayinī,
they met with the rest of their friends. On their way,
a woman joined their party. She had lost her way
while going to the land of Mālava. Śrīdatta and Niṣṭh-
ūraka walked in the company of that woman and at
last they arrived at a deserted city. They spent the
night in that city. During the night when Śrīdatta
happened to wake up, he saw to his horror, that the
woman had killed his friend Niṣṭhūraka and was eating
his flesh. Śrīdatta at once drew his sword and caught
hold of her hair and was about to cut off her head when
she was transformed into a Rākṣasa woman. She prayed
to him not to kill her and told him her story. She had
become a Rākṣasa woman by a curse. Long ago Viśvā-
mitra did tapas to obtain Kubera's place. At that time
Kubera sent her to break Viśvāmitra's tapas. Since she
failed in her attempts to attract him by her charms, she
tried to subdue him by assuming the form of a terrible
monster. The sage thereupon cursed her to become a
Rākṣasa woman with that figure. He declared that the
curse would be lifted when Śrīdatta grasped her hair.
She added that she had been killing and eating the
inhabitants of that city for a long time and that explain-
ed why the city had become deserted. Now that she was
liberated from the curse, she asked Śrīdatta what boon
he wished to have.
<div n="NI"/>He replied that he only wanted his friend to be restored
to life. After reviving Niṣṭhūraka, she disappeared.
Early next morning they reached Ujjayinī. There, they
met their old friends, Bāhuśālī and others. Śrīdatta
described to them his experiences after sinking in the
Gaṅgā.
<div n="NI"/>Later, once when Śrīdatta went to a festival, he happened
to meet Mṛgāṅkavatī, daughter of a King named Śrī-
bimbaki. They fell in love with each other. When she
left the place, Śrīdatta felt very much depressed. Bāhu-
śālī and others also knew about it. They offered to take
him to Mṛgāṅkavatī. But just then she fell down un-
conscious, bitten by a snake. Śrīdatta soon restored her
with the help of the magic ring which Vidyutprabhā
[Page736-b+ 65]
had given him earlier. After that he returned with his
friends to Bāhuśālī's house, leaving behind the ring
with Mṛgāṅkavatī. The King who was deeply grateful
for the cure of his daughter sent plenty of wealth and
gold to Śrīdatta. But Śrīdatta gave all of them to
Bāhuśālī's father. He was always doting on Mṛgāṅka-
vatī and was much pained at his separation from her.
At this stage, the princess's favourite maid came to him
on the pretext of returning the magic ring and informed
him that Mṛgāṅkavatī was also pining for him and was
even prepared to die for his sake. Śrīdatta sent her
back with a secret message of love and cheer. After that
in consultation with his friends he made a plan to take
the princess secretly to Mathurāpurī. On the next day,
Bāhuśālī with three of his friends left for Mathurā
pretending to go there for trade. He made all arrange-
ments on the way for the secret conveyance of the
princess. That night, Śrīdatta sent a woman and her
daughter to the palace after making them senseless with
heavy drink and arranged for their sleeping there. As
directed by Śrīdatta, Bhāvanika set the palace on fire
and slipped out of the building with the princess. Śrī-
datta sent them at once to Mathurāpurī. The woman
and her daughter who were burnt alive in the palace
were supposed to be the maid and the princess. Śrīdatta
set out to Mathurā to meet Mṛgāṅkavatī. On the way
he saw several evil omens. On arrival at Vindhyavana,
he saw his friends lying helpless, after having been
severely beaten up by unknown enemies. They informed
him that a stranger leading a powerful army over-
powered them and galloped away on horseback, taking
the princess with him.
<div n="NI"/>Śrīdatta immediately started in pursuit of the unknown
enemy. Shortly after, he caught sight of the army led
by a Kṣatriya prince who was taking Mṛgāṅkavatī on
horseback with him. After a fierce fight, Śrīdatta
rescued the princess from the youth, captured his horse
and rode on it with her towards his friends. When they
had gone a short distance, the horse which had been
wounded in the battle, fell dead on the way. At that
time he went in search of water to quench their thirst,
leaving Mṛgāṅkavatī at the spot. By the time he
returned with water, the sun had set. So he lost his
way and wandered about in the forest till day-break
when he reached the place where he had left Mṛgāṇka-
vatī. But she was not seen anywhere there. To get a
better view of the neighbourhood in the hope of finding
her, he climbed to the top of a tree near by, after placing
his sword on the ground. Just then a hunter named
Śabara came that way and took up Śrīdatta's sword.
Śrīdatta saw this, but he got down from the tree and
instead of attacking him, merely asked him whether he
knew about the whereabouts of Mṛgāṅkavatī. To this
Śabara said that he thought that she had reached his
cottage and asked Śrīdatta to accompany his followers
to the cottage. He also offered to go with him and
promised to return his sword after reaching there.
<div n="NI"/>Śrīdatta reached the cottage with them. Being utterly
exhausted, he fell into a deep slumber. When he woke
up he found that his legs were chained together. While he
was lying thus, a woman named Mocanikā approached
him and said:—“Why did you come here to court
death? Śabara has now gone out on some business. As
soon as he returns he will offer you as a sacrifice to
Bhadrakālī. It is for that purpose that he has brought
[Page737-a+ 65]
you here and put in chains. But there is yet one way
of escape for you. This Śabara has a very beautiful
daughter. She has fallen in love with you. If you marry
her everything will turn out well.”
<div n="NI"/>For his own safety, Śrīdatta married Śabara's daughter
according to the Gāndharva method. Shortly after, she
became pregnant. Her maid Mocanikā informed her
mother all about it. That kind and affectionate mother
came to Śrīdatta and said:—“Śabara is a very cruel
man. If he comes to know of this, he will never forgive
you. Therefore you must leave the place at once, but
you should never forget my daughter.” With these
words she took leave of him. Śrīdatta disclosed the story
of that sword to her and started on his journey again,
in search of Mrgāṅkavatī. From a hunter whom he
happened to meet on the way, he came to know that she
was living in a place called Nāgasthala near Mathurā,
under the protection of Viśvadatta a Brāhmaṇa.
<div n="NI"/>Śrīdatta at once went to Viśvadatta's house and made
enquiries about his wife. Viśvadatta informed him that
he had entrusted her with a Brāhmaṇa who was the
minister and priest of King Śūrasena. He suggested
that Śrīdatta should stay with him that day and they
could proceed to Śūrasena's place next morning.
<div n="NI"/>Śrīdatta accordingly stayed there and started for
Mathurā at day-break on the next day. On the way
he took bath in a tank just outside the city. While bath-
ing he happened to get a silk cloth and a necklace of
beads from the bed of the tank. After his bath, he
entered the city with the silk and necklace. Mistaking
him for a thief, the police arrested him. Really the silk
and necklace had been hidden in the tank by thieves.
Śrīdatta was produced before the King with the stolen
articles. The king condemned him to death. Mṛgāṅ-
kavatī who was staying in the custody of the minister
happened to see Śrīdatta being taken to the place of
execution. She immediately ran up to the minister and
told him that Śrīdatta was her husband. When the
King came to know it, he ordered him to be brought
back to the palace. As soon as Śrīdatta saw the minister,
he felt certain doubts about his identity. The minister
had a striking resemblance to his father's brother
Vigatabhaya who had left home years ago. His doubts
were confirmed when the minister revealed his identity
and the two embraced each other after their long
separation. Śrīdatta narrated the whole story of his
sufferings and misfortunes beginning from the murder
of Kālanemi up to that time. On hearing his tragic
story, the minister burst into tears and told him that he
had received a boon from a Yakṣī by which he had
obtained 5000 horses and plenty of wealth. All this he
gave to Śrīdatta and his wife.
<div n="NI"/>The king of that country had a daughter. Śrīdatta's
next plan was to marry her also. Vigatabhaya gave
him the necessary help. The minister took her with
Śrīdatta and his friends on the pretext of offering wor-
ship at the temple in Avantī. They had to encounter
a band of robbers on the Vindhya mountain. Śrīdatta
was overpowered and the robbers plundered all their
wealth. Vigatabhaya and others were captured.
Śrīdatta was taken to be sacrificed to Bhadrakālī. When
he was about to be sacrificed, his wife, the daughter of
Śabara arrived there with her son. It was within the
territory of Śrīcaṇḍa. She stopped the robbers from
performing the sacrifice and returned to her own house
[Page737-b+ 64]
with Śrīdatta. The Caṇḍāla band took Vigatabhaya and
others to Śrīdatta and they were released. After the
death of King Śabara, Śrīdatta became the King of
that wood. He got back his sword Mṛgāṅkaka. He
married the daughter of Śūrasena. Śrīdatta's friends
also came there. All of them joined together and killed
Vikramaśakti in a battle. After that Śrīdatta was crown-
ed king of the whole country up to the ocean. (Kathā-
saritsāgara, Kathāmukhalambaka, Taraṅga 2).
<LEND>
