<L>6757<pc>738-b<k1>सृष्टि<k2>सृष्टि
SṚṢṬI¦ (CREATION). The Indian theory of creation
is given below:
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Triguṇas%} (The three attributes). The base of the
universe is the set of the three attributes. They are
Sattva (purity), Rajas (passion) and Tamas (inertia).
Only things which could be seen, possess these three
attributes. Things which could be seen are perishable.
The indestructible could not be seen. Shape or form
is an attribute. God has no form. So god is without
attributes. The God devoid of attributes can be realised
by knowledge, but cannot be seen with the ordinary
eyes. The three attributes have a power each. Know-
ledge is the power of Sattva, activity, the power of Rajas
and reason the power of Tamas.
<div n="NI"/>2) {%The five elements.%} From the divine power of Tamas,
five senses came into being, such as sound, touch, form,
taste and smell. Sound is the attribute of ether; touch,
the attribute of air; form, the attribute of fire; taste, the
attribute of water; and smell, the attribute of earth.
These are the minute senses or essentials. These five
senses having the divine powers, joined together with
the five minute essentials, make up the attribute of
Tamas.
[Page739-a+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>From the attribute of Sattva having the power of
knowledge, the ten essentials, such as air, the Sun,
Pāśī (Varuṇa) two Aśvinī-gods, Candra (Moon),
Brahmā, Rudra, Kṣetrajña and mind, came into being.
From these essentials the formation of five matters took
place. They are the five elements. When vigour
enters the quintupled elements, egoism is given a form.
This vigour with perceptible body is called Ādi Nārā-
yaṇa (Primordial Nārāyaṇa). Anyhow, quintupled
elements will be bright with firm attributes. Ether has
the attribute of sound only. Air has the attributes of
sound and touch. Fire has the three attributes of sound,
touch and form. Water has the four attributes of sound,
touch, form and taste, and earth has the five attributes
of sound, touch, form, taste and smell. The variegated
expression of these five elements is called the universe.
It is stated in Devī Bhāgavata, Skandha 3, that the
number of species of living beings found in the universe
is eightyfour lakhs.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%The embodied three (Trinity).%} It has been mentioned
in the last section how the three attributes came into
existence and how the five elements originated from the
three attributes and how vigour or energy acted upon
the five elements and Ādi Nārāyaṇa or Viṣṇu came into
being. In this section the birth of the three divine figures
is being dealt with.
<div n="NI"/>In the known beginning, on the surface of the wide
waters, covering the universe made of the five elements,
Mahāviṣṇu lay on a banyan tree, as a child. “Who am
I? How was I made, and what for? What have I to
do?”, and so on were the thoughts of the child. Ins-
tantly a voice from the ether fell into his ears saying,
“I am everything. There is nothing eternal except me.”
Mahāviṣṇu lay contemplating on the voice he heard,
when Mahādevī appeared before Mahāviṣṇu and said
thus:—“Lo! Mahāviṣṇu! Whenever the universe
required creation, preservation and destruction, by the
potentiality of the Omnipotence or the Brahman with
no attributes, you too had taken origin. Understand
that the Omnipotence is beyond attributes. We all are
within the purview of attributes. Your attribute mainly
is Sattva. From your navel, will be born Brahmā with
Rajas as his main attribute and from the forehead of
that Brahmā, Śiva with Tamas as his main attribute
will be born. By the power of penance, Brahmā will
acquire the power of creation and with the help of the
attribute of rajas, he will create a world of the colour
of blood. You will be the protector and preserver of
that world, and at the end of the Kalpa (world-age)
Śiva will destroy that world. I am that power of purity,
which stands as help and assistance to you in creation.”
Accordingly, Brahmā was born from the navel of Viṣṇu
and Śiva was born from the forehead of Brahmā.
(Devī Bhāgavata, Skandha 1).
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Creation. Sprouts, Animals and Humanity.%} After the
birth of the Trinity, while Brahmā was contemplating
on creation, some creations of the attribute of Tamas
originated from him unknowingly. It was Avidyā
(Ignorance), having inertia, desire, great desire, dark-
ness and great darkness as its five branches. That god
continued his contemplation. Then five kinds of immov-
ables without the power of knowledge or brightness in
and out alike, and with souls covered with darkness,
originated. As these immovables are said to be promi-
nent, the creation of them is called prominent creation.
[Page739-b+ 65]
These are called Sprouts (Udbhids). Seeing that this
creation was not sufficient, the god again sat in
contemplation. This time animals having horizontal
back bones and organs of sense were created. They
were called tiryaksrotas, as they walked horizontally.
They, such as cow etc. are having more of the attributes
of darkness and less of knowledge. They traverse
wrong paths due to lack of knowledge though they think
otherwise. Egoism, pride and twentyeight kinds of
incapacities are their qualities. Though they possess
knowledge inwardly they do not know each other.
Thinking that this creation also was not sufficient,
Brahmā again engaged himself in contemplation, and
there came out another creation. It was called ‘Ūrddhva-
srotas’ (flowing upwards). This third creation
having the attribute mainly of Sattva moved in a lofty
level. Those who were born in this creation, desired
for comfort and pleasure and were with the light of
knowledge inwardly and outwardly. When the third
creation called Devasṛṣṭi (creation of gods) originated
from Brahmā he grew happy and contented.
<div n="NI"/>Even after creating thus much, Brahmā did not feel
satisfaction. So he made the creation of ‘Arvāksrotas’
(moving downwards). The creatures of this group were
having the attributes of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas in an
advanced degree. So they are miserable and full of
activity. They are human beings.
<div n="NI"/>Thus having completed the creation of Udbhids
(Sprouts), Tiryaks (animals) and Arvāks (human beings)
Brahmā passed on to the creation of heavenly beings.
(Viṣṇu Purāṇa, Aṃśa 1; Chapter 5).
<div n="NI"/>5) {%Creation. Night, Day, Evening, Morning.%} After this
Brahmā again sat in contemplation for water-creation
which is the creation of Devas, Asuras, Pitṛs and
Manuṣyas (Gods, Demons, the Manes and Man). As
he was sitting in contemplation, the attribute of
Tamas (inertia) advanced in him and the asuras
(demons) were born from his loins. Then Brahmā
discarded the figure of Tamas in him. That discarded
figure of darkness became the night. Next, from the
face of Brahmā, the Devas (gods) were born. They
were having the attribute of Sattva (purity). Brahmā
discarded that figure of purity also. That figure
became the bright day. So the asuras are powerful in
the night and the Devas are powerful in the day. After
this, the manes were born from Brahmā. They were
also discarded. They became the evening between the
day and night. Then Brahmā assumed the figure
having the attribute of Rajas. From this, man, who
was having more of the attribute of rajas was born.
Brahmā discarded that figure also. It became a very
shining thing which is called the Dawn. So men
are powerful in the dawn and the manes are powerful
in the evening. The four creations of Day, Night,
Evening and the Dawn are considered to be the bodies
of Brahmā. (Viṣṇu Purāṇa, Aṃśa 1, Chapter 5).
<div n="NI"/>6) {%Creation. Rākṣasas (Giants), Yakṣas (Demi-gods),%}
{%Serpents, Devils, Gandharvas%} Brahmā again assumed
another figure having the attribute of Rajas. Due to
this Brahmā felt hungry. Along with hunger desire
also grew in him. Then the Prajāpati (Lord of
Emanation) sat in the darkness and created some
creatures which were very hungry. Uncouth with
plenty of hair on the face, they ran towards Brahmā.
Of them those who said, ‘don't do so, save him’
[Page740-a+ 65]
became Rākṣasas (giants). Those who said “We will
eat him”, became Yakṣas, (demi-gods). Because of
Yakṣaṇa (Bhakṣaṇa-Food), they got the name Yakṣa.
Because of the dislike at seeing these creatures the
hair had fallen from the head of Brahmā. They crept
back again into his head. Because they did ‘sarpaṇa’
(creeping up) they were called sarpas (serpents) and
as they were ‘Hīna’ (fallen) they were called Ahis
(serpents). After this the Lord of creation became
very angry and created some creatures. Because of
their colour which was a mingling of red and black,
they were horrible and they became piśitāśanas (those
who eat flesh). Then Brahmā began to sing and from
his body the Gandharvas were born. Because they did
‘dhayana’ (Appreciate) of ‘go’ (word) when they were
born, they were called Gandharvas.
<div n="NI"/>7) {%Creation. Birds, animals.%} After creating all these creat-
ures, Brahmā created birds, from his ‘vayas’ (strength),
as free agents, according to their actions in the previous
lives. Then Brahmā created sheep from his breast and
goats from his face. From his stomach and flanks he
created cows, and from his legs he created other creat-
ures such as the horse, elephant, donkey, wild bull, deer,
camel, mule, antelope etc. He created plants bearing
fruits and bulbs from his hairs. Though Brahmā had
created vegetables and animals at the beginning of the
Kalpa (world-age), they came to be properly used in
sacrifices only from Tretāyuga (one of the four ages)
The animals such as the cow, sheep, goat, horse, mule
and donkey are called domestic animals and flesh-eaters
such as the leopard, animals with forked hoof such as
the wild bull, elephant, monkey, birds, and other
animals and reptiles, are included in the word ‘wild
animals’.
<div n="NI"/>8) {%Creation-The Vedas etc.%} After having completed crea-
tion of the things mentioned above, the Prajāpati created
from his face looking to the east, the Vedic metre
Gāyatrī, Ṛgveda, Trivṛtstoma, the sāma song called
Rathantara and the sacrifice called Agniṣṭoma; from
his face looking to the south, Yajurveda, the Vedic metre
Traiṣṭubha, Pañcadaśa stoma. Bṛhatsāma and the sacri-
fice Uktha; from his face looking to the west, Sāmaveda,
the Vedic metre Jagatī, Saptadaśastoma, Vairūpasāma
and the sacrifice Atirātra. Thus all the creatures lofty
and lower originated from the body of Brahmā. After
having created Devas, Asuras, the manes and men,
Brahmā again at the beginning of the world age, created
Yakṣas, Devils, Gandharvas, celestial maids, Naras,
Kinnaras, Rakṣas, cows, birds, animals, serpents etc.
such as have long life and short life, movable and immo-
vable, that we see in the world. Creatures which are
created again and again do perform functions which
creatures of their kind had been doing previously.
Habits of killing or not killing, kindness or cruelty,
righteousness or evil, truth or falsehood are adopted by
them as becoming to their kind in previous lives. It was
Brahmā who had created the uses and differences seen
in the sense organs, elements and bodies. Brahmā took
from the Vedic voice the shape, form, name, activities
etc. of various creatures such as the Devas etc. and
allotted them to each particular kind. So also he allotted
names, work etc. to hermits as seen in the Vedas.
<div n="NI"/>9) {%Creation of the four castes.%} See under Cāturvarṇya.
<div n="NI"/>10) {%Creation of Prajāpatis.%} When Brahmā saw that the
subjects he had created, did not flourish, he created first
[Page740-b+ 65]
the Sanaka brothers and the mental sons of Bhṛgu,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Aṅgiras, Marīci, Dakṣa, Atri
and Vasiṣṭha, and gave these nine the name Prajāpatis
(Lords of Emanation). Then he created nine women
named Khyāti, Bhūti, Sambhūti, Kṣamā, Prīti, Sannati,
Ūrjā, Anasūyā. and Prasūti and gave in marriage
Khyāti to Bhṛgu, Bhūti to Pulastya, Sambhūti to Pulaha,
Kṣamā to Kratu, Prīti to Aṅgiras, Sannati to Marīci,
Ūrjā to Dakṣa, Anasūyā to Atri and Prasūti to Vasiṣṭha.
The great hermits such as Sanandana and the others
created before the Prajāpatis, were not desirous of pro-
pagation as they were wise sages who had renounced
all attachments and who had been indifferent. When
Brahmā saw that they were not mindful about produc-
ing subjects he grew angry. (It was from the middle of
the eye brows which were curved by his fury, that Śiva,
one of the three divine figures was born). After this,
Brahmā appointed Svāyambhuva, who originated from
himself, and was of the same shape, as the first Manu
for the protection of the subjects. This divine Manu
Svāyambhuva took his sister Śatarūpā as wife. Two
sons named Priyavrata and Uttānapāda and two
daughters named Prasūti and Ākūti were born to them.
Of the two daughters Prasūti was given to Prajāpati
Dakṣa and Ākūti to Prajāpati Ruci. A son named
Yajña and a daughter named Dakṣiṇā were born as
twins to Prajāpati Ruci. Twelve sons were born to
Yajña by Dakṣiṇā. They were devas named the Yamas
of the Manvantara of Svāyambhuva. Dakṣa begot
twentyfour daughters of Prasūti. They were Śraddhā,
Lakṣmī, Dhṛti, Tuṣṭi, Medhā, Puṣṭi, Kriyā, Buddhi,
Lajjā, Vapus, Śānti, Siddhi, Kīrti, Khyāti, Satī, Sam-
bhūti, Smṛti, Prīti, Kṣamā, Santati, Anasūyā, Ūrjā,
Svāhā and Svadhā. Of these the first thirteen
were given to Dharmadeva as wives. Of the remaining
daughters, Khyāti became the wife of Bhṛgu, Satī, the
wife of Śiva, Sambhūti of Marīci, Smṛti, of Aṅgiras,
Prīti of Pulastya, Kṣamā of Pulaha, Santati of Kratu,
Anasūyā of Atri, Ūrjā of Vasiṣṭha, Svāhā of Agni, and
Svadhā of the manes. (Viṣṇu Purāṇa, Aṃśa 1; Chapter
7).
<div n="NI"/>11) {%The children of the Prajāpatis.%} To Prajāpati Bhṛgu,
Lakṣmī who became the wife of Viṣṇu and two sons
named Dhātā and Vidhātā were born by Khyāti. These
two married Āyati and Niyati the two daughters of
Meru. To the two couples two sons named Prāṇa and
Mṛkaṇḍu were born. From Mṛkaṇḍu, Mārkaṇḍeya was
born, and from Mārkaṇḍeya, Vedaśiras was born. To
Prāṇa a son named Dyutimān and to him a son named
Rājavān was born. From this Rājavān the Bhṛgu
dynasty grew up.
<div n="NI"/>Sambhūti the wife of Marīci gave birth to a son named
Paurṇamāsa. To Aṅgiras four daughters named
Sinīvālī, Kuhū, Rākā and Anumati were born by Smṛti.
Three sinless sons named Candra, Durvāsas and
Dattātreya were born to Atri by Anasūyā. Of them
Dattātreya was a hermit. A son named Dattoli was
born to Pulastya by Pratīti (Prīti). That Dattoli was the
Agastya of Svāyambhuva Manvantara. Kṣamā the wife
of Pulaha gave birth to three sons named Kardama,
Urvarīyān and Sahiṣṇu. Santati the wife of Kratu, gave
birth to sixty thousand hermits called Bālakhilyas.
Seven sons named Rajas, Gotra, Ūrdhvabāhu, Savana,
Anagha, Sutapas and Śukra were born to Vasiṣṭha by
his wife Ūrjā. These sons were the seven hermits of
[Page741-a+ 63]
the third Manvantara. Three bright sons Pāvaka
Pavamāna and Śuci were born to god Agni (fire) by his
wife Svāhā. Fortyfive sons were born to them. (Viṣṇu
Purāṇa, Aṃśa 1, Chapter 10).
<div n="NI"/>12) {%Creation—Living things.%} Creations of Sprouts, ani-
mals, Men, Devas, Dānavas and so on have been dealt
with. But all these creations were pertaining to the
world of gods only. Sprouts and animals were born in
the earth only from Prajāpati Kaśyapa, the son of
Marīci.
<div n="NI"/>Prajāpati Kaśyapa married Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kālikā,
Tāmrā, Krodhavaśā, Manu and Analā, the eight
daughters of Dakṣa. From Aditi, the Devas, Ādityas,
Vasus and the Rudras were born. Daityas were born
from Diti and Dānavas from Danu. The asuras Naraka
and Kāla were born to Kālikā. Five daughters named
Krauñcī, Bhāsī, Śyenī, Dhṛtarāṣṭrī and Śukī were born
to Tāmrā. Owls were born from Krauñcī. Bhāsī gave
birth to the Bhāsas. Hawks and Vultures were born from
Śyenī; Swans, geese and ruddy geese were born from
Dhṛtarāṣṭrī. Natā was born from Śukī and Vinatā
was born from Natā. Ten daughters named Mṛgī,
Mṛgamandā, Harī, Bhadramatā, Mātaṅgī, Śārdūlī
Śvetā, Surabhi, Surasā and Kadrū, were born to
Krodhavaśā. Mṛgī gave birth to animals. From
Mṛgamandā, bears, young deer and Bos grunniens were
born. Lions and monkeys were the sons of Harī. A
daughter named Irāvatī was born to Bhadramatā.
Airāvata was the son of Irāvatī. Elephants were born from
Mātaṅgī. Tigers were born from Śārdūlī. The eight ele-
phants supporting the globe were born from Śvetā. Two
daughters named Rohiṇī and Gandharvī were born to
Surabhi. Cattle were born from Rohiṇī, and horses
were born from Gandharvī. Surasā gave birth to
Nāgas (serpents) and Kadrū gave birth to Uragas
(reptiles). Men were born from Manu. The trees were
born from Analā. Garuḍa and Aruṇa were born from
Vinatā. Sampāti and Jaṭāyu were the sons of Aruṇa.
(Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, Araṇya Kāṇḍa, Sarga 14).
<div n="NI"/>(Facts about creation seen in various Purāṇas do not
agree with each other. This essay is based on facts
gathered from various Purāṇas. So disagreements may
occur in it.)
<LEND>
