<L>6919<pc>751-a<k1>सुदर्शन<k2>सुदर्शन<h>VII
SUDARŚANA VII¦. The son born to god Fire by his wife
Sudarśanā. (Sudarśanā was the daughter of Duryodhana
(Nīla) of the dynasty of Ikṣvāku. For the story of her
marriage see under Sudarśanā). Sudarśana, the son of
Fire, married Oghavatī the daughter of Oghavān. That
story is given below:-
<div n="NI"/>Oghavān had two children a daughter named Oghavatī
and a son named Ogharatha. Oghavān gave his daughter
in marriage to Sudarśana who was wise and learned.
The couple lived in Kurukṣetra. Once Sudarśana said
to Oghavatī thus:- “You should honour guests in all
ways. If it is the desire of a guest, you should not draw
back from giving even your body. Whether I am present
here or not a guest should not be insulted.” Oghavatī
promised to obey the order of her husband to the letter.
Sudarśana had been trying to become victorious over
Mṛtyu (Death) and so Death had been waiting to find
out some vulnerable point in Sudarśana's life. While
Sudarśana had gone to cut firewood, a brahmin entered
the hermitage and said to Oghavatī:- “If you do observe
the duties of a house-holder show hospitality to me.”
Hearing this, Oghavatī welcomed the brahmin and per-
formed the usual hospitality and asked him “What
shall I do for you?” “Give yourself to me”, was the
answer. Seeing that the guest was not contented with
the usual hospitalities and remembering the words of her
husband, Oghavatī gave herself to the guest. Both of
them entered the interior of the hermitage. At this
moment Sudar ana returned with firewood, and looked
for Oghavatī and called her aloud, several times. He
got no reply. Then the Brahmin who was lying inside
called out:-“Hei! Son of Fire! A guest has come. Your
wife showed all kinds of hospitality. But I was not con-
tented with them. Now she is offering herself to me.”
<div n="NI"/>These words did not seem to make any change in
Sudarśana. Dharmadeva was much pleased, as Sudar-
śana had come out victorious in all these tests. He came
out and appeared in his own form and blessed Sudar-
śana. Due to the blessing of Dharmadeva, half of the
body of Oghavatī flowed as the river Oghavatī and the
other half was dissolved in the soul of her husband.
Sudarśana thus earned victory over Mṛtyu and obtained
prosperity.
<LEND>
