<L>6943<pc>753-a<k1>सुदेवा<k2>सुदेवा<h>III
SUDEVĀ III¦. The wife of Ikṣvāku who was the son of
Manu. This Sudevā was the daughter of Devarāta the
King of Kāśī. Ikṣvāku and Sudevā are said to be the
incarnations of Viṣṇu and Devī Lakṣmī respectively.
While the couple were walking about in the forest, they
saw a she-hog. That hog was the cursed form of a
Brahmin woman named Sudevā. Sudevā, the wife of
Ikṣvāku gave the merits she had earned in one year by
her good deeds to Sudevā the she-hog and liberated her
from her curse. This story occurs in Padma Purāṇa
Bhūmikhaṇḍa, Chapter 42. The story is given below:
<div n="NI"/>Once King Ikṣvāku and his wife Sudevā were hunting
on the banks of the Gaṅgā. Then a big hog came there
with his wife and children. The hog was afraid of
Ikṣvāku. So he said to his wife:—“Look! beloved!
Ikṣvāku the valiant, the son of Manu, is come for hunt-
ing. I am going to fight with him.” His wife said. “How
did you get this bravery to fight with the king, you who
always try to evade the forest-men?” “It is not
[Page753-b+ 64]
bravery, my love. It is because I could go to heaven if
I fight with the king valiantly and meet with heroic
death”, replied the hog. The wife tried her utmost to
dissuade her husband from his attempt. The children
also tried to stop him. They could not change his mind.
So all of them decided to help him as much as they
could in his fight. They got ready for a fight against
Ikṣvāku and his army.
<div n="NI"/>The king's army saw the preparations of the hogs and
their resolute stand. Struck with fear, they informed
Ikṣvāku about it. The king ordered the noble hog to be
caught. Ikṣvāku and his wife mounted on horse and
followed the army. All the hounds ran towards the
hogs barking. The army sent a volley of arrows at the
hogs. The hog and his wife stopped the arrows. The
army could not defeat the hogs. At last the king him-
self killed the hog with a club. While the king was
looking on, that noble hog was changed to a noble
Gandharva with four hands and divine clothes and
ornaments. Leaving his old body of hog on the earth
he rose up into the sky like the Sun and went to heaven.
Seeing this sight Sudevā was struck with fear. She got
down from the chariot and called the wife of the hog
towards her. The wife of the hog, wounded all over,
came to the queen Sudevā. Sudevā asked her about
the previous history of her dead husband. The hog's
wife said: “Lady! If you feel interested I shall tell you
about the previous life of my dead husband and my-
self.”
<div n="NI"/>“My dead husband was a Gandharva named Raṅkavidyā-
dhara, in the previous birth. Once he sat in the shade of
a tree near the hermitage of Pulastya and began to sing
with accompaniment. As the singing caused disturbance
to his solitude the hermit Pulastya came and requested
the Gandharva to shift to some other place. Raṅkavid-
yādhara did not like to comply with the request
of the hermit. At last Pulastya removed his hermitage
to another place. Raṅkavidyādhara walked in search
of Pulastya. Finally the Gandharva saw Pulastya.
Seeing that he was alone, the Gandharva took the shape
of a hog and entered the hermitage and began to wound
with his tusk and to molest that radiant sage Pula-
stya. Thinking it to be a mere animal Pulastya suffered
it for a long time. The hog continued its actions of
molestation. It passed excrements in front of the sage,
danced before him, played in front of him, fell down in
the courtyard and rolled and did various other things.
As it was an animal Pulastya forgave him. One day
Raṅkavidyādhara entered the hermitage as a hog, roared
aloud, laughed aloud, cried aloud, sang aloud and in
various other ways tried to change the mind of the her-
mit. Seeing all these, Pulastya began to think that it
was not a hog. “A hog will not try to molest one con-
tinuously. I forgave him thinking him to be a mere
animal. This must be that wicked Gandharva.” Thus
recognizing him Pulastya got angry and cursed him
thus: “You tried to violate my penance in the shape of
a hog. So you, great sinner; take the next birth as a
hog.” With grief the Gandharva ran to Indra and in-
formed him of everything. Indra requested Pulastya
to liberate the Gandharva from the curse. Accordingly
Pulastya gave him remission that he would regain his
original form when he was killed by the hands of the
immensely good king Ikṣvāku.”
[Page754-a+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>Sudevā was amazed on hearing this story of the dead
hog, and asked her again. “You hog! You speak like a
human being. How is it?”
<div n="NI"/>The wife of the hog continued the story. “Lady! I also
have taken rebirth as a hog. In my previous birth I was
the daughter of a Brahmin named Vasudatta (Vāsudeva)
in the city of Śrīpura in Kaliṅga. They named me
Sudevā (Vasudevā). Because of the unlimited caressing
and fondling of my father I grew up as an arrogant
girl. In the meanwhile a Brahmin youth named Śiva-
śarmā, who was well-versed in all the branches of know-
ledge, and whose parents were dead, came to my house.
My father gave me to that brahmin. I lived with him
in my father's house. Being proud of the wealth and
prosperity of my parents I did not care to render the
services due to my husband. My husband who was a
peaceful man bore everything. By and by I became wicked.
At last because of my wickedness and immorality my
husband left the country. My father hated me and
expelled me from the house. My father feared that
some calamity would happen to me as Kaṃsa was born
to Padmāvatī, the wife of Ugrasena, by her illegal con-
nection with persons other than her husband.”
<div n="NI"/>Hearing about the birth of Kaṃsa, Sudevā asked the
she-hog to tell her about the circumstances which led to
the illegal connections of Padmāvatī. The wife of the
hog continued. “In days of old there was a king in
Mathurāpurī named Ugrasena, who married Padmāvatī
the daughter of king Satyaketu of Vidarbha. While the
couple were living happily in Mathurāpurī Satyaketu
wanted to see his daughter. He sent a messenger to
Mathurāpurī and brought Padmāvatī to Vidarbha. She
walked along the vicinity of the palace in which she was
born, enjoying the beauty of the scenery. She walked on
and arrived on the mountain called Puṣpavān, and sat
on the bank of a lake. At that time a Gandharva named
Godila (Dramila) came there. He fell in love with her.
He took the shape of Ugrasena and came near her and
talked with her. Thinking that her husband had come
from Mathurā to see her she embraced him. After a
while she understood that the visitor was not her
husband. She began to curse him. The visitor admitted
that he was Godila an attendant of Vaiśravaṇa. Godila
went on his way. But she had become pregnant by that
time. Her parents tried in various ways to destroy the
child in her womb. One day the infant lying in her
womb told her thus: “Mother! you do not know who
I am. I am the rebirth of a powerful asura named
Kālanemi. In ancient days Viṣṇu killed me in a battle
between the gods and asuras. I have entered into your
womb for revenge. Mother! you need not take the
trouble to destroy me.” Saying so, the infant stopped
speaking. After ten years Padmāvatī gave birth to the
mighty and strong Kaṃsa. He was killed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and he attained heaven.”
<div n="NI"/>Sudevā was struck with wonder at the story of Kaṃsa.
She asked the she-hog to continue her own story. She
continued her own story. “I have said that my father
expelled me. Being shameless I walked away from there
soon. Nobody helped me. Those who saw me scolded
me. Days passed. Afflicted by a horrible disease, and
travelling in this manner, I came to a big house. I
entered the courtyard and begged for alms. It was the
house of my husband Śivaśarmā. When I abandoned
him he married another woman named Maṅgalā and
[Page754-b+ 64]
was leading a prosperous life. Maṅgalā gave me food.
Śivaśarmā asked me who I was. I told him my story.
He remembered me, his former wife. Maṅgalā also felt
compassion for me. They gave me gold ornaments and
made me stay there. But my conscience pricked me.
Thus burning internally I died.
<div n="NI"/>My soul went to hell. After the suffering of a very long
period, I took birth again as a Jackal. Then I became
a dog, and then a snake. After that I passed through
the births of a hen, a cat and a rat. Thus Brahmā had
put me in the wombs of all kinds of animals. Now I have
taken the birth of a she-hog. Lady! Your husband
Ikṣvāku is the incarnation of Viṣṇu in portion and your-
self, that of Lakṣmī in portion. If you would give me
the merits you have earned for one day by your good
deeds, I could leave off all these mean births and attain
heaven.”
<div n="NI"/>The eyes of Sudevā were full when she heard the story
of the hog. She gave to the she-hog, the merits she had
earned by good deeds for one year. The hog was changed
to a divine woman of youth and beauty. Immediately
a divine chariot came down from heaven and took her
to heaven, while everybody was looking on. Ikṣvāku
and Sudevā returned to their palace much pleased at
the redemption of the she-hog.
<LEND>
