<L>6979<pc>756-a<k1>सुग्रीव<k2>सुग्रीव<h>I
SUGRĪVA I¦. Bāli and Sugrīva were brothers. Their
mother was Aruṇa who once put the guise of a woman.
At that time he was called by the name Aruṇī. Bāli
was the son born to Indra by Aruṇī and Sugrīva was the
son born to the Sun by Aruṇī. Both of them were
brought up in the hermitage of Gautama. When the
King of Kiṣkindhā Ṛkṣarajas died, Bāli was anointed
the king of Kiṣkindhā. Sugrīva lived with Bāli, serving
him. At this time Bāli engaged in a battle with the
asura Dundubhi. Bāli chased Dundubhi into a cave.
Placing Sugrīva at the mouth of the cave, Bāli went
in. By the magic and sorcery of Dundubhi, it appeared
to Sugrīva that Bāli was killed by Dundubhi. Sugrīva
returned to Kiṣkindhā. Bāli who came out, followed
Sugrīva to kill him due to misunderstanding. Bāli chased
Sugrīva all over the world. It is mentioned in Vālmīki
Rāmāyaṇa, Kiṣkindhā Kāṇḍa, Sarga 46, that the know-
ledge of the lay-out of the various countries in the
world that Sugrīva got in this running, helped him
later, in the search for Sītā.
<div n="NI"/>At last Sugrīva entered Ṛṣyamūkācala. Bāli had been
once cursed that if he entered this mountain his head
would be broken into pieces. Hanūmān became the
minister of Sugrīva. It was during this period that Śrī
Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa came by that way in search
of Sītā. Sugrīva and Śrī Rāma entered into a treaty.
Bāli should be killed and Kiṣkindhā should be given
to Sugrīva in place of which Rāma should be helped to
find out Sītā and get her back.
<div n="NI"/>Śrī Rāma killed Bāli and gave Kiṣkindhā to Sugrīva,
who sent monkey-armies in all directions to find out
Sītā. Hanūmān found out Sītā and returned to Śrī
Rāma, who fought a great battle with Rāvaṇa, in which
battle Sugrīva took a prominent part. It was Kumbha-
karṇa, who oppressed the monkey army much. When
he caught Sugrīva, Kumbhakarṇa lost his ears and
nose. Then he caught hold of the monkey warriors and
Śrī Rāma cut off his hands with arrows. (Agni Purāṇa,
Chapter 1). After the war, when Rāma and others
returned to Ayodhyā, Sugrīva also accompanied them.
After that Sugrīva returned to Kiṣkindhā. After a few
years Candragupta, the second son of Sahasramukha
Rāvaṇa, carried away the daughter of Sugrīva. Hear-
ing this, Śrī Rāma confronted Sahasramukha Rāvaṇa,
who was killed by the arrow of Sītā.
<div n="NI"/>Sugrīva participated in the horse-sacrifice performed by
Śrī Rāma. The control of the army was in the hands
of Sugrīva, the financial affairs, with Vibhīṣaṇa and
central powers, with Lakṣmaṇa. When the sacrifice
was completed, Sugrīva returned to Kiṣkindhā.
<LEND>
