<L>7434<pc>781-a<k1>श्वेतरश्मि<k2>श्वेतरश्मि
ŚVETARAŚMI¦. An elephant. A Gandharva happened
to be born as a white elephant in the Kaliṅga country,
as a result of a curse. Śvetaraśmi is the name of that
elephant. The King Ratnādhipa mounted that elephant
and did many exploits.
<div n="NI"/>King Ratnādhipa was the ruler of the island Ratna-
kūṭa. He was a prominent Vaiṣṇava. He did tapas to
Viṣṇu with the object of conquering the whole earth
and to get all princesses as his wives. Mahāviṣṇu
appeared before him and said:—“A Gandharva has been
born in the land of Kaliṅga by a curse as a white
elephant. His name is Śvetaraśmi. As directed by me,
he will come to you. You may ride him and he will
take you through the air across the sky. All the Kings
against whom you fight, will be defeated and they will
offer their daughters to you as tribute.”
<div n="NI"/>Next day, the elephant Śvetaraśmi descended before him
through the air. As advised by Mahāviṣṇu Ratnādhipa
mounted the elephant and conquered the whole world
and secured numerous princesses. One day as the King
was riding the elephant and travelling through the air,
an eagle came and pecked at the forehead of the ele-
phant. Ratnādhipa drove it away by a thrust with his
spear. But the elephant fell down unconscious. Even
after five days he did not rise. The King offered prayers
to the “Lokapālakas”. He was about to cut off his own
head and offer it as sacrifice to them. Just then he
heard a mysterious voice saying:—“Do not be rash;
Śvetaraśmi will rise at the touch of a chaste woman.”
<div n="NI"/>The King at once went to the palace and brought his
chief queen who was kept closely guarded and asked
her to touch the elephant. But he did not rise. Then
he ordered all the rest of his wives in turn to touch the
elephant. Still the elephant did not rise. When he found
that none of his 80,000 wives was a “chaste woman”,
the King was ashamed of himself. Then he brought
every one of the women in his kingdom and made them
touch the animal one by one. But it was all in vain. At
this stage, when Ratnādhipa was very much depressed,
a merchant named Harṣagupta from Tāmralipti
happened to come there. He was accompanied by his
[Page781-b+ 65]
wife Śīlavatī. She touched the elephant and immedi-
ately it stood up. Ratnādhipa was very much pleased
and married Śīlavati's sister Rājadattā. After offering
many rich presents to Śīlavatī and Harṣagupta Ratnā-
dhipa took Rājadattā on the back of Śvetaraśmi to a
deserted island Catuśśāladvīpa and left her there under
the protection of several women attendants. The King
spent his nights at Catuśśāladvīpa and days in his own
palace.
<div n="NI"/>One day Rājadattā was remaining alone in her resi-
dence. The attendants had gone out to attend to various
duties. At this time a man happened to arrive there
from somewhere. He was Bhavanasena, the son of a
Vaiśya. He reached the island with the help of a piece
of wood which was floating in the sea after a shipwreck.
Rājadattā who heard his story, was irresistibly attract-
ed by him and she embraced him. Just then the King
arrived on the scene. Consoling himself by thinking
that this was also the will of Fate, he let off the Vaiśya
youth.
<div n="NI"/>The King returned to his palace and decided to spend
the rest of his life by doing tapas in the forest, after
giving away all his wealth and property to the poor.
When he was about to mount Śvetaraśmi, the animal
suddenly transformed itself into a man of divine glory,
dressed in gorgeous clothes and jewels. He spoke to the
King as follows:—“I am a Gandharva. My name is
Somaprabha. There is my elder brother Devaprabha
who lives on the Malaya mountain. My brother had a
wife named Rājavatī. Once all the three of us went to
worship in a Viṣṇu temple at a place called Siddhā-
vāsa. At that time my sister-in-law sang a devotional
song. A Siddha who was enchanted by her song was
looking fixedly at her. Enraged at it, my brother asked
the Siddha why he was staring at his wife with lustful
eyes. The innocent Siddha was naturally provoked by
the question and pronounced a curse that my brother
and his wife would be born in human wombs and in
that birth, he would see his wife having sexual union
with a stranger. When I heard my brother being cursed
I became very angry. I hurled a toy elephant which
was in my hand at the time, at the Siddha. He then
cursed me also to become a white elephant just like
the toy with which I hit him. I am that younger
brother and you are my elder brother. This Rājadattā,
your queen was my sister-in-law Rājavatī. Our curse
is now over.” As soon as he concluded, all the three
of them renounced their earthly bodies and were restored
to their original forms. (Kathāsaritsāgara, Ratna-
prabhālambaka, Taraṅga 2).
<LEND>
