<L>7472<pc>784-a<k1>तालध्वज<k2>तालध्वज
TĀLADHVAJA¦. The phantom husband of Nārada. Once
Nārada became a woman and a king called Tāladhvaja
married her (Devī Purāṇa). It was to show how the
mind is covered with illusion that Mahāviṣṇu made
Nārada into a woman.
<div n="NI"/>Once Nārada went to Mahāviṣṇu and asked him about
the secret of life. Mahāviṣṇu said that there was nothing
called life and life exists because of Māyā the illusion
of the mind. Nārada insisted that he should see ‘Māyā’
(illusion) and so Viṣṇu started from Vaikuṇṭha with
Nārada on the back of Garuḍa.
<div n="NI"/>Crossing forests, rivers, cities, lakes, villages and mount-
ains they reached Kanyākubja. There they saw a
beautiful lake. Garuḍa landed and Viṣṇu and Nārada
got down. They walked along the shore of the lake
for some time and then they sat beneath a tree for some
time. After some time Mahāviṣṇu asked Nārada to
take a bath in the lake. Pleased at this command
Nārada placed his violin and deer-hide on the shore
and after first washing his face and feet and doing
‘ācamana’ with Kuśa grass in his hand stepped into
the water for his bath. Mahāviṣṇu stood near the violin
and deer-hide of Nārada and Nārada dipped himself in
the water. What a surprise! Nārada was changed into
a woman of great beauty. She had no memory of her
previous birth and getting herself on to the shore she
stood there watching the surroundings there. Then a
king called Tāladhvaja came on horse-back that way.
He addressed the beautiful woman as Saubhāgyasundarī
and started talking with her. Within hours they got
married and Tāladhvaja took her to his palace and
spent the honey-moon there happily. Twelve years went
by and Saubhāgyasundarī became pregnant. In due
course she got a son named Vīravarmā. After another
two years she got another son named Sudharmā. Thus
she delivered a son every two years for twentyfour
years becoming the mother of twelve sons. After some
time she bore eight more sons also. When all the twenty
sons came of age they were married according to the
custom and in due course those sons also got sons. Thus
Tāladhvaja and Saubhāgyasundarī became the heads of
a large family of children and grand-children and lived
happily. One day a king from a far-off place with a
great army suddenly came and surrounded Kanyākubja.
In the fight that ensued most of the sons and grand-sons
of Saubhāgyasundarī were killed. The king fled from
the battlefield and came to the palace. Saubhāgyasundarī
was in great distress and when the enemies left the battle-
field she secretly went there to have a last look at her
sons and grandsons lying dead. The sight terrified her.
They lay there without heads, hands or legs, eyes pro-
truded, stomach cut open, intestines lying out and blood
oozing out from everywhere. She fell to the ground
[Page784-b+ 65]
and wept bitterly. Then Mahāviṣṇu came there dis-
guised as an old brahmin and talked to her. He gave
her instructions on some truths about life. Saubhāgya-
sundarī then called Tāladhvaja and they both went to
the old lake and as instructed by the old brahmin
Saubhāgyasundarī took a dip in the water. Lo! she
became the old Nārada.
<div n="NI"/>When Nārada got up from the lake Mahāviṣṇu was
still standing near his violin and deer-skin smiling at
him. The sight of Viṣṇu gave him knowledge of all
that had happened. He stood there recounting in his
memory how he had requested Viṣṇu to show him
Māyā and how he had taken a bath in that lake and
how he had spent a long period of married life ending
in misery and how Viṣṇu had come to her in the form
of an old brahmin when she had cried to him in agony
and how the old brahmin had taken her and Tāladh-
vaja to the lake again and how he had become his
old self again. He stood there still pondering over these
when Viṣṇu called him and said “Come on Nārada,
how slow you are. Finish your bath and come soon.
What are you thinking about?” Tāladhvaja, however,
was unmoved by any of these. He was puzzled to find
a bearded Sannyāsī rising up from the place where his
beautiful wife had dipped herself for a bath. He went
to Nārada and asked “Oh best of sages, where is my
wife who has just dipped herself in this same place?
From where do you come?” Even before waiting to
hear a reply from him the King began to make a hue
and cry about the loss of his wife. Then Mahāviṣṇu
went to him and consoled him by saying with illustra-
tions that ‘human ties are only ephemeral’ and asked
him to take a bath in the lake. Tāladhvaja after his
bath became disgusted with life and after doing penance
in the forests attained mokṣa. (8th Skandha, Devī
Bhāgavata).
<LEND>
