<L>7540<pc>788-a<k1>ठिण्ठाकराल<k2>ठिण्ठाकराल
ṬHIṆṬHĀKARĀLA¦. A prodigal person who lived in
Ujjayinī. He used to defeat all in the game of dice.
With the money so received from defeated persons he
would buy wheat and go to the burial ground and after
making bread with it would eat it dipped in ghee sitting
before an oil light placed before an idol of Mahākāla
(lord of the burial ground). He would then lie there
itself and sleep.
<div n="NI"/>One night he saw the idols in the Mahākāla temple twin-
kling. He jumped up and challenged the idols for a
game of dice. The idols stood mute and Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla
taking their silence to be consent according to the rules
of gambling fixed a wager and played. He won and
then he said addressing the idols “I have defeated you.
Give me the money due to me.” The idols stood silent
and he, therefore, wrestled with them. Still the idols
stood dumb. Then Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla took his sword.
Instantly the devas gave him the money due to him.
Early morning he went away from there and spent the
money lavishly. At night he came back again and
challenged the idols for gambling as before. This be-
came a daily routine and the devas felt themselves
harassed. They, therefore, approached the goddess
Cāmuṇḍī and she advised them to refrain from playing
as there was no loss of honour if one refused to take a
challenge to gamble.
<div n="NI"/>That night also as usual Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla came and chal-
lenged the idols for a game of dice. Then the idols said
“We are not prepared to play.” Then he challenged
Mahākāla himself to play. Mahākāla also refused to
play. Then suddenly the mind of Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla
changed and he did penance to please Mahākāla. Mahā-
kāla was pleased with him, appeared before him and
blessed him.
<div n="NI"/>Once a few nymphs came to bathe in the Mahākālī
pond and as per the instructions of Mahākāla, Ṭhiṇṭhā-
[Page788-b+ 65]
karāla took away their robes while they were bathing.
He demanded a nymph named Kalāvatī in return for
their robes and finding no other way they gave him
Kalāvatī.
<div n="NI"/>Kalāvatī thus became the wife of a Man due to a curse
of Indra. Once she praised sexual enjoyment with men
on earth and decried the same with Devas. Indra heard
it and he cursed her “Then let her become the wife of a
man on earth and enjoy the pleasures there.” All this
story Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla learned from Kalāvatī. She added
she wanted to go to Devaloka the next day for a dance
with Rambhā. Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla consented and he also went
to Devaloka and saw the dance, sitting along with the
Devas.
<div n="NI"/>When Rambhā's dance was over, there was the dance
of a goat. Seeing that Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla said to himself:
“Why, this is a goat I used to see daily in Ujjayinī. How
did it come here to dance?” When the dances were over
and the people dispersed, Kalāvatī took Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla
to the Mahākālī temple. Next day he met the same
goat in Ujjayinī and then he enquired “Hi, do that
dance which you did yesterday before Indra in devaloka.
Let me see” The goat stood dumb thinking of how
this man on earth came to know of the dances in Deva-
loka. Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla once again compelled the goat to
show its dance but when the goat still refused to dance,
he thrashed it with a stick on its head and the goat
immediately went to Devaloka and informed Indra
about the incident. Indra felt sad when he saw blood
oozing from the wound on its head. Indra by his divine
powers then understood that Kalāvatī was at the bottom
of all this trouble and cursed her to remain as a doll
on a pillar in the temple belonging to King Narasiṃha
of Nāgapura. Alambuṣā, mother of Kalāvatī, who heard
the curse begged for relief and Indra said she would get
freed from the curse when the king himself demolished
the temple and razed the place to the ground.
<div n="NI"/>True to the curse, Kalāvatī after giving all her orna-
ments to Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla bid him good bye and went
and remained as a doll on the temple-pillar at Nāga-
pura. Deeply distressed at this mishap of his wife,
Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla dressed himself as an ascetic and went to
Nāgapura. There he purchased five earthen pots and
filled them with the ornaments of Kalāvatī. He buried
four of the pots in the forests and the fifth in the bazaar
near the temple. Then he built a hermitage on the
shores of a near-by river and started living there. News
soon spread that a great yogī had come to the city and
the King went to see him. They talked for a while on
religious and spiritual matters and the King was about
to leave when they heard the howl of a jackal. The
yogī smiled and the King asked him why he smiled.
He refused to answer but the King insisted and then
the yogī said “Oh King, the jackal says that in a forest
to the east of the city under a silver plant is a treasure.”
The King immediately ordered his men to go and dig
at the place and when they did they got the treasure.
The King offered the treasure to the yogī but he
refused to accept it. Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla then on three
different occasions pointed out to the King the three
other pots in the forests and the King got great confi-
dence in the powers of the yogī. One day he went to
the temple with the King and while they were walking
around a crow crow and the yogī smiled. The King
again asked him the reason and the yogī said that
[Page789-a+ 65]
there was a treasure pot in the bazaar near-by. When
they searched at the spot directed by the yogī the
treasure was found.
<div n="NI"/>On another day the King and the yogī went to the
temple and as they walked about they saw the doll on
one of the pillars crying. The King asked the yogī the
reason for the doll crying thus. The yogī replied
“Oh, King this temple is not located in a proper place.
Further the deity here was not installed at an auspi-
cious time. If this continues the King will come to
ruin. That was why the doll cried.” On hearing this
the King ordered the temple to be completely demo-
lished and the place made a plain ground. The order
was carried out and Kalāvatī got release from the
curse. She went to heaven and told Indra all that had
happened. Indra immediately sent Kalāvatī to fetch
Ṭhiṇṭhākarāla to heaven and then both of them lived
happily in heaven. (Taraṅga 2, Viṣamaśīlalambaka,
Kathāsaritsāgara).
<LEND>
