<L>7546<pc>789-b<k1>तिरयाट्टम्<k2>तिरयाट्टम्
TIRAYĀṬṬAM¦. A form of unrefined drama current in
Kerala. This ancient art originally came into being to
propitiate some gods. There are others of this kind like
‘Mutiyeṭṭu’ ‘Tīyāṭṭu’ and ‘Ayyappan Pāṭṭu’ which all
belong to a class of Ritualistic plays.
<div n="NI"/>This folk drama is a colourful pageant devoted to
gods. Its artistic value is worth noticing. This is known
by different names like ‘Tira’, ‘Teyya’ and ‘Kaliyāṭṭam’.
‘Tira’ in ancient language means ‘daivadarśana’ (sight
of gods) ‘Teyya’ is the corrupt form of ‘daiva’. Tirayā-
ṭṭam is a visible amusement where actors appear dressed
as gods. Because the actors dance in the dresses of gods,
this is called devāṭṭam also. Teyyāṭṭam is the distorted
form of devāṭṭam. Because this is both a Kali (play) and
an āṭṭam (dance) this is called Kaliyāṭṭam also.
<div n="NI"/>This is held in different parts of Malabar during the
period of January to April. It is a programme of three
days. The first programme is to exhibit an Ālākolam.
This is done on the night of the first day. The second
programme is to exhibit the vellāṭṭukolam which will be
done on the second day evening. An indication of this
is given on the first night itself. The programme of the
second day begins with a dance called Velakkali. On
that day there will be worshipping of gods at intervals.
The Vellāṭṭukolam begins by five in the evening. The
chief actor will present himself before the public in the
colourful robes of a god and will begin to dance to the
accompaniment of drums and music. As the dance and
music continues even those without dresses would start
dancing. Gradually sounds of pop-guns and instru-
mental music will rend the air. The chief dancer after
dancing for some-time would place a stool before the
temple and spread a white cloth on it. Then the dancer
would sit in meditation and do the ceremony called
‘calling the gods’. He would then pray to the gods to
bless the function and appear at the zodiacal sign of
Virgin. The dance and music start again. Then the
people assembled would throw rice and flower into the
cloth on the stool. The dancer-god holds a weapon in
his hand and changes it often making huge uproars.
Then after finishing the ceremonies like Kāvūṭṭu and
Arulappāṭu, the Vellāṭṭakkāran retires. Then another
actor in the dress of another god appears as Vellāṭṭak-
[Page790-a+ 64]
kāran and repeats the programme of his predecessor.
Because the dance (āṭṭam) is done before a white (vella)
cloth the dance is called Vellāṭṭam.
<div n="NI"/>After the vellāṭṭam before midnight Tirayāṭṭam begins.
The dresses of the teyyas differ slightly from each other.
Some Tiras wear jackets and skirts while some wear
flower garlands made of Tulasī leaves (basil plant) and
ceṭṭi (jungle geranium). All the tiras rush to the temple
in great spirit and they are followed by lamp-holders
and torch-bearers to the accompaniment of loud sounds
of musical instruments and uproars from the spectators.
When the first round of dances is over, the ‘Teyya’
stands dancing, pouring blessings to the people and
deciding ways of atonement for the sins done. Then
food is offered to the gods and the function ends with
a ‘Vela’ circling the temple.
<LEND>
