<L>7547<pc>790-a<k1>तिरुज्ञानसम्बन्ध<k2>तिरुज्ञानसम्बन्ध
TIRUJÑĀNASAMBANDHA¦ (R). He was one of the
four Dākṣiṇātya Śaivamatācāryas. He lived during the
early part of the seventh century. The book on Dākṣi-
ṇātya Śaivamata is called Tirumura. There are twelve
songs in that book. They were compiled by Nambi-
yāṇḍār Nambi who lived during the period of Rājarāja
Cola. The first seven of these are devotional songs
called Tevāras. They were composed jointly by Tiru-
jñānasambandhar, Tirunāvukkaraśar and Sundaramūrti.
The first three tevāras are of Tirujñānasambandhar.
The twelfth tirumura is called Periyapurāṇa. Its author
was Śekkizhār. He was called Arulmozhitteva also. He
was the chief minister of Anapāyacola who ruled during
the period 1063 to 1112 A.D. The theme of Periya-
purāṇa is the life history of sixty-three Śaivasiddhas who
were renowned as Nāyanārs and Aṭiyārs. It is in the
sixth chapter of the second part of this book that they
discuss Tirujñānasambandhar.
<div n="NI"/>He was born in the village of Śīrkāzhi (Brahmapura)
near Kumbhakoṇam in the district of Tañjāvūr. His
father was Śivapādarāya and mother Bhagavatiyār.
Once when Śivapādarāya went to bathe in the temple
tank called Brahmatīrtha he took along with him his
son Sambandhar also. Keeping his son on the steps of
the tank Śivapādarāya plunged himself into the waters.
Śiva and Pārvatī who came that way saw the child
sitting alone and Pārvatī went and fed him with her
breast-milk. From that moment onwards the child
started singing songs in praise of Śiva and Pārvatī.
When he grew up, he did many wonderful deeds visiting
many Śiva temples of Pāṇḍirājya. His father fixed up
a marriage for him and the bride's party assembled
even before time at the Cidambara temple. Tirujñā-
nasambandhar came there in time and standing before
the temple deity sang a song in praise of Śiva. The song
was greatly appealing and at the end of the song before
all those assembled there Sambandhar to the astonish-
ment of all merged with the deity.
<LEND>
