<L>7582<pc>792-b<k1>त्रिजटा<k2>त्रिजटा
TRIJAṬĀ¦. A servant demoness of the palace of Rāvaṇa.
Trijaṭā was one among the demonesses who were deput-
ed to entice Sītā, sitting dejected under the Aśoka
tree, to the side of Rāvaṇa. All the demonesses slept
around Sītā. Trijaṭā had a dream one night which is
described in Chapter 27 of Sundara Kāṇḍa thus:
“Śrī Rāma dressed in pure white robes and accom-
panied by Lakṣmaṇa dropped to the place from air in
a chariot built with ivory and drawn by a thousand
swans. After that they came to Sītā on the back of
Airāvata. Śrī Rāmā took Sītā in his lap and rose up
into the air. They went high to reach the Sun and
Sītā was seen patting on the Sun and the moon. Then
Airāvata which was carrying Rāma, Sītā and
Lakṣmaṇa came to the top of Laṅkā. Then they came
to this place in chariot. Then they travelled to the
north in a Puṣpaka vimāna. Rāvaṇa with oil smeared
on his body and looking all red was lying on the
ground. His head was clean shaven. He was drinking
oil from a pot and was shouting loudly. Then Rāvaṇa
went to the south on the back of a donkey. When
he had travelled a short distance he fell from the
donkey head downwards. Rising from there he was
muttering many vulgar words. Then Rāvaṇa sank
into a foul-smelling dung-mire. A black woman
wearing a red saree and mud smeared all over her
body came near him and dragged him to the south.
Kumbhakarṇa also was subjected to her torture. All
the members of Rāvaṇa's family were seen smeared
with oil. After that they all travelled south again.
At that time Rāvaṇa was seen on the back of a hog,
Kumbhakarṇa on the back of a camel and Indrajit
on the back of a crocodile. Vibhīṣaṇa alone was seen
standing near the Puṣpaka Vimāna on the back of
a four-tusked elephant wearing white robes and
white garlands and sweet-smelling pastes smeared all
over his body and holding a white umbrella with the
four ministers by his side and the royal band playing.
At that stage the beautiful city of Laṅkā with its whole
army fell into the ocean. Then a monkey messenger
of Śrī Rāma burnt the city of Laṅkā. All the women
demonesses and Kumbhakarṇa were seen lying in a cow-
dung pit wearing red dress.”
[Page793-a+ 64]
When Trijaṭā repeated her dream to her companions
all were frightened to death. After the Rāma-Rāvaṇa,
battle, it is stated in Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, that Śrī
Rāma gave presents to Trijaṭā. (Śloka 41, Chapter 291,
Vana Parva).
<LEND>
