<L>7592<pc>794-a<k1>त्रिशङ्कु<k2>त्रिशङ्कु<h>I
TRIŚAṄKU I¦. (SATYAVRATA, MATAṄGA). A
celebrated King of the Solar dynasty.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Genealogy.%} Descending in order from Brahmā—
Marīci—Kaśyapa—Vivasvān—Vaivasvata Manu—
Ikṣvāku—Vikukṣi—Śaśāda—Purañjaya (Kakutstha)—
Anenas—Pṛthulāśva—Prasenajit, Yuvanāśva—Mān-
dhātā—Purukutsa—Trasadasyu—Anaraṇya—Haryaśva
Vasumanas—Sudhanvā—Trayyāruṇa—Satyavrata
(Triśaṅku).
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Father discards him.%} When Satyavrata grew up he
became a lewd, lustful imprudent man. One day while he
was leading such a contemptuous life, a marriage was
being conducted in a brahmin house. Guests had
assembled, the bridegroom had come and the ceremony
was about to start when Satyavrata entered the
marriage hall and carried away by force the bride to
the shock of all those present there. Some of the Brahmin
guests immediately went to Trayyāruṇa and told him
what a shameful crime his son had committed. The enrag-
ed father at once sent Satyavrata out from the palace.
Satyavrata left the country altogether and went and
stayed in a colony of harijans. Though he lived with
those low-caste people he did not adopt their mode of
living. He went out daily to the forests with his bow
and arrow and made his food. He never felt any
animosity towards his father who had thus sent him out
from his country. He thought thus “Of course, my father
got terribly angry when he heard the complaints of the
Brahmins and in that mood punished me thus, though
the punishment was a bit too much. But our family
preceptor Vasiṣṭha, who knows everything, who is a
moralist and a righteous man, who has the knowledge
and authority to prescribe atonement for all sins, did
severe punishment. That was very hard.” As he thought
more about it in this vein, he felt a great hatred towards
Vasiṣṭha.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Satyavrata and Viśvāmitra's family.%} When his only
son Satyavrata was turned out from the family, King
Trayyāruṇa was greatly distressed. He went to the
[Page794-b+ 64]
forests to do penance to get another son. At that time
the country did not have rains for twelve successive
years as a punishment for the King for sending out his
son. The people suffered much. Among the people who
were suffering were the wife and children of Viśvāmitra.
Viśvāmitra at that time had gone to the shores of river
Kauśikī for doing penance. Viśvāmitra's family consist-
ing of his wife and three sons during that famine lived
in hunger. At last the mother decided to sell the middle
son and buy food with the money received by the sale.
She put a rope made of darbha grass round the neck
of the boy and took him to the market. On the way
Satyavrata saw them and on hearing their sad story told
them not to sell the child. He assured them that he
would take care of them till the return of Viśvāmitra.
He removed the darbha rope from the child's neck and
the child got the name of Gālava from that time on-
wards. (Gala=neck). He promised them he would
daily place enough meat at the foot of a tree near the
āśrama. True to his promise, he hunted in the forests
and brought to the foot of the tree fresh flesh of deer or
hare or boar and also fresh fruits. The family lived
happily because of him.
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Curse of Vasiṣṭha and the name of Triśaṅku.%} When
Trayyāruṇa went to the forests to do penance, it was
Vasiṣṭha who was managing the affairs of the palace.
The heir-apparent Satyavrata lived in the hut of a
caṇḍāla. Every minute Satyavrata's hatred towards
Vasiṣṭha increased in strength. One day Satyavrata did
not get any game even after a day's hunting and at
dusk he happened to reach the āśrama of Vasiṣṭha
where he saw Nandinī, the beloved cow of the sage,
grazing by the side of the āśrama. Anger, desire and
hunger made him imprudent and without thinking of
the consequences Satyavrata killed Nandinī and after
eating enough to appease his hunger took the rest to
feed the family of Viśvāmitra. The wife of Viśvāmitra
little knowing that it was cow's flesh cooked it and
ate it.
<div n="NI"/>That night when Vasiṣṭha came to the āśrama he found
Nandinī missing and he went in search of it. After some
time the sage knew that Satyavrata had killed and eaten
it. The enraged sage called Satyavrata to his side and
cursed him thus “You will from today become a
caṇḍāla. Three śaṅkus (sins) namely wrath of a father,
abduction of another man's wife and consumption of
cow's flesh will give you life-long trouble and thus you
will earn a name, Triśaṅku (Three śaṅkus). Instantly
Satyavrata became a caṇḍāla and started roaming
about in the streets.
<div n="NI"/>5) {%Triśaṅku becomes King.%} Triśaṅku, distressed at heart
by a father's wrath and a Guru's curse walked about
aimlessly in the forests. He expressed his desire to the
ṛṣis and Brahmins to do a yāga and get himself absolved
of all his sins. But nobody was willing to help a wretch-
ed man cursed and abandoned by both his father and
his Guru. Feeling desperate, he decided to commit
suicide. He made a great fire-pit and prepared himself
to jump into it. Before doing that he prayed to the
goddess and when the goddess knew that his devotee
would jump into the fire and become ashes, she appear-
ed before him in person and said thus: “Son, why do
you try to jump into the fire? Your father has become
old and day after tomorrow he will crown you as King
[Page795-a+ 65]
and then go to the forests to do penance. Look, there
comes your father's minister to take you to the palace.”
When the goddess disappeared Satyavrata returned to
his āśrama in a pensive mood. Nārada went and in-
formed the king of everything that happened in the
forest and the king immediately sent his ministers to
fetch Satyavrata to the palace. When Satyavrata came
the king crowned him as king and then went to the
forests for penance.
<div n="NI"/>6) {%Satyavrata becomes Caṇḍāla again.%} Satyavrata ruled the
country for a long time. He was a pious ruler, devoted
to god and soon he developed a desire to go to heaven
with his mortal body. He approached Vasiṣṭha first
for this purpose. But the family preceptor told him
there was nothing in the śāstras about any yāga which
could help one to go bodily to heaven. Disappointed
he approached the sons of Vasiṣṭha who ridiculed him
when he told them of his queer desire. Triśaṅku got
angry and left them saying “Let me see whether there
are others in this country who could send me bodily to
heaven.” Those arrogant words annoyed Vasiṣṭha and
his sons and they cursed him and made him a caṇḍāla
again. Triśaṅku thereafter did not return to the palace,
but went to the forests to live there. He knew if he
returned to the palace as a caṇḍāla he would not be
recognised by his wife and children.
<div n="NI"/>Hariścandra, son of Triśaṅku, heard about the curse on
his father and sent the ministers to fetch his father to
the palace. But Triśaṅku did not come back and so the
ministers made Hariścandra the king of Ayodhyā.
<div n="NI"/>7) {%Viśvāmitra meets Triśaṅku.%} When Hariścandra became
king, Triśaṅku was living in Ambāvana (forest of Ambā)
as a great devotee of the goddess. It was at that time
that Viśvāmitra returned home after his penance. Viśvā-
mitra enquired of his wife how they managed to live
during the great famine. Then Satyavatī, wife of Viśvā-
mitra, told him the whole story of how Satyavrata helped
them, why he killed Nandinī, Vasiṣṭha's cow, and how
they ate cow's flesh, how Satyavrata was cursed to be a
caṇḍāla, how he was called back as king and how he was
at that time living in Ambāvana. The eyes of Viśvā-
mitrā became wet when he heard the sorrowful story
and he decided to end the caṇḍālatva (state of being a
caṇḍāla) of Satyavrata. He went straight to Ambāvana
and met Triśaṅku there.
<div n="NI"/>8) {%Triśaṅku Svarga (Heaven of Triśaṅku).%} Viśvāmitra pro-
mised Triśaṅku that he would send him to heaven bodily
and made preparations for a yāga. No other sage par-
took in the yāga because of instructions from Vasiṣṭha.
But undaunted, Viśvāmitra conducted the yāga alone
and, as the power of his performances increased, Tri-
śaṅku started rising bodily from earth slowly and soon
rose up to heaven. When the devas found a Caṇḍāla
standing with his physical body before the gates of
heaven, they ran to Indra and told him. Indra got
angry and pushed him out from heaven and Triśaṅku
came falling down with his head turned downwards to
the earth. Triśaṅku cried loudly calling Viśvāmitra
by name. When Viśvāmitra, hearing the noise, looked
up he saw poor Triśaṅku descending fast from heaven
with his head turned upside down. Viśvāmitra's anger
knew no bounds and he roared aloud “Let Triśaṅku
stay where he is now.” Triśaṅku stopped in mid-air.
Indra did not allow Triśaṅku to come up and Viśvā-
mitra did not allow him to come down. Indra then made
[Page795-b+ 64]
a separate heaven for Triśaṅku below original
heaven. Then Viśvāmitra started to create another Indra
and devas for the new heaven. The devas were frightened
and Indra then approached Viśvāmitra and requested
him to desist from his attempt to make duplicate devas
promising him that he would give Triśaṅku a seat in
his heaven itself. Viśvāmitra agreed to it. At once
Indra brought a golden Vimāna and took him bodily to
heaven. (Sargas 57 to 59, Bālakāṇḍa, Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa
7th Skandha, Devī Bhāgavata; 9th Skandha, Bhāgavata;
Chapter 13, Harivaṃśa; Sundara Kāṇḍa, Kamba
Rāmāyaṇa; Chapter 71, Ādi Parva; Chapter 12, Sabhā
Parva).
<LEND>
