<L>7626<pc>797-b<k1>तुलसी<k2>तुलसी
TULASĪ¦. (Holy Basil plant.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%General information.%} Tulasī is a plant held most
sacred by the Hindus. There is a Purāṇic background for
Tulasī attaining this spiritualistic importance. In fact
it is Mahālakṣmī, wife of Viṣṇu, who had herself taken
the form of Tulasī. There is a story about it in Devi
Bhāgavata.
<div n="NI"/>2) {%The curse of Sarasvatī.%} Sarasvatī, Gaṅgā and
Lakṣmī were all, in the beginning, wives of Mahāviṣṇu.
The Lord loved all the three equally. One day all the
four were sitting together when Gaṅgā sent lustful
glances at Viṣṇu which was immediately noticed by
both Sarasvatī and Lakṣmī. Sarasvatī got angry and
rising up caught hold of the hair of Gaṅgā and dragged
her to the ground. Lakṣmī then caught hold of Saras-
vatī to prevent further assault but Sarasvatī then
poured all her rage on Lakṣmī and cursed her to be
born as a plant on earth. Gaṅgādevī could not bear
this and she cursed Sarasvatī to be born as a river on
earth. Sarasvatī retorted with a curse that Gaṅgā also
would be born as a river. When the whole tumult was
over Viṣṇu called Lakṣmī to his side and said—“Oh
Devī, do not worry. Things have happened as predes-
tined. You go and be born as the daughter of Dharma-
dhvaja and grow up there. From there by divine grace
you will be transformed into a plant sacred enough to
make all the three worlds pure. That plant will be
named Tulasī. When you will be thus living as Tulasī,
a demon named Śaṅkhacūḍa with part of my virile
strength will be born and he will marry you. Then you
can come back to me. The holy river Padmāvatī will
also be another form of your spirit.”
<div n="NI"/>3) {%The story of Dharmadhvaja.%} Who was this Dharma-
dhvaja to whom was born Mahālakṣmī as a daughter?
In times of old there was a Manu called Dakṣasāvarṇi
who was extremely virtuous and a part of Viṣṇu. Des-
cending from Dakṣasāvarṇi were Brahmasāvarṇi-
Dharmasāvarṇi-Rudrasāvarṇi-Devasāvarṇi-Indrasāvarṇi
Vṛṣadhvaja. This last named was a great devotee of
Śiva and because of his great affection for this devotee
Śiva lived a whole period of a devayuga in the āśrama
of Vṛṣadhvaja. King Vṛṣadhvaja by an edict prohibited
the worship of any other deity than Śiva in his country.
Even the worship of Mahālakṣmī ordained by the Vedas
during the month of Bhādra (September) became ex-
tinct. All Yāgas and worship of Viṣṇu came to a stop.
Sūrya (Sun-god) got angry at this belittling of other
gods than Śiva and cursed the King Vṛṣadhvaja that he
would cease to be prosperous. Śiva did not like it and
he went to punish Sūrya holding his trident in his
hand. Sūrya was frightened and he approached his
father Kaśyapa. Kaśyapa and Sūrya went to Brahmā
and acquainted him with all details. Brahmā also was
helpless in the matter and so all the three of them went
to Mahāviṣṇu. They prostrated before Viṣṇu and told
him all. At that time Śiva also came there. Addressing
all of them Viṣṇu said “Oh, Devas, within this half an
hour twentyone yugas have passed by on the earth. He
about whom you have come to speak to me is dead and
gone. Even his son Rathadhvaja is dead. The latter
has two sons named Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja.
They are dull and splendourless now because of the curse
of Sūrya and are now worshipping Lakṣmī.” Saying
thus Viṣṇu disappeared.
[Page798-a+ 63]
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Birth of Tulasī.%} Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja
did penance to propitiate Mahālakṣmī. Kuśadhvaja
had a wife named Mālāvatī. She bore a daughter named
Vedavatī. Sītā, wife of Śrī Rāma, was a rebirth of this
Vedavatī.
<div n="NI"/>King Dharmadhvaja had a wife named Mādhavī. Mahā-
lakṣmī entered her womb as an embryo and after a hund-
red years Mādhavī gave birth to a daughter. Even at the
time of birth the child looked like a matured girl and was
extremely pretty. She was therefore, called Tulasī, meaning
matchless. (Tula=match). This Tulasī abandoning all
worldly pleasures went to Badarikāśrama and started doing
penance there with the prayer that Mahāviṣṇu should
become her husband. She did penance for twentyfour
thousand years sitting amidst fire in the hot season and
sitting in water in the cold season and taking only
fruits and water as food. Then she did penance for ano-
ther thirtythousand years eating leaves only, another forty
thousand years taking air only as food and another ten
thousand years without any food. At this stage Brahmā
appeared and asked her the object of her Penance. She
replied she wanted Mahāviṣṇu to be her husband.
Hearing this Brahmā said thus—“Devi, you know the
cowboy Sudāmā born of a part of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. That
brilliant cowboy has now been born on earth, due to a
curse of Rādhā, as a demon named Śaṅkhacūḍa. He is
matchlessly eminent and has once fallen in love with
you seeing you at Goloka. You will become his wife and
later you can become the wife of Nārāyaṇa. At that
time a part of your divine body will remain on earth as
a plant named Tulasī. Tulasī will become the most
sacred of all plants, dear to Viṣṇu, and all worship
without using Tulasī leaves would be ineffective.”
<div n="NI"/>5) {%Marriage of Tulasī.%} Due to a curse of Rādhā,
Sudāmā, the cowboy, was born on earth as a demon
named Śaṅkhacūḍa. He did penance sitting at Badarik-
āśrama and obtained Viṣṇukavaca. Another object of
his was to marry Tulasī. He obtained a boon from
Brahmā that his death would occur only when the
Viṣṇu Kavaca was removed from his body and the
chastity of his wife was lost. At that time Śaṅkhacūḍa
and Tulasī met each other in the forests and were
married. Śaṅkhacūḍa, brilliant and majestic, went
about with Tulasī in amorous sports creating jealousy
even among the devas. His arrogance gave innumer-
able troubles to the devas and they along with Brahmā
and Śiva approached Mahāviṣṇu for a remedy.
Viṣṇu then sent Śiva with his spike to kill Śaṅkhacūḍa
and he himself started to molest the chastity of his wife
Tulasī. Śaṅkhacūda took leave of Tulasī to go
and fight with Śiva. When Tulasī was thus left alone,
Mahāviṣṇu in the form of Śaṅkhacūḍa approached
Tulasī and after some preliminary talks entered into
sexual acts. Tulasī found some difference in the usual
sexual methods and suspecting foul play jumped up to
curse the impostor. At once Mahāviṣṇu appeared in
his true form and said “You have been doing penance
for a long time to get me as your husband. Your
husband Śaṅkhacūḍa was the chief of my Pārṣadas,
Sudāmā. It is time for him to go back to Goloka get-
ting himself released from the curse. By this time Śiva
would have killed him and he would have gone to
Goloka as Sudāmā. You can now abandon your body
[Page798-b+ 65]
and come with me to Vaikuṇṭha to enjoy life as my
wife.
<div n="NI"/>Your body will decay and become a holy river named
Gaṇḍakī; your hair will become Tulasī plant the
leaves of which will be held sacred in all the three
worlds.”
<div n="NI"/>Tulasī then changed herself into the form of Lakṣmī
and went to Vaikuṇṭha with Mahāviṣṇu. (9th Skandha,
Devī Bhāgavata).
<div n="NI"/>6) {%The greatness of Tulasī.%} Everything of the Tulasī
plant, leaves, flowers, fruits, roots, twigs, skin and even
the soil around is holy. The soul of a dead one whose
dead body is cremated using Tulasī twigs for firewood
would attain a permanent place in Viṣṇuloka. Even
great sinners would be absolved of their sins if their
dead bodies are cremated with Tulasī twigs. If at the
time of death one thinks of God and mutters His name
and if his dead body is later cremated with Tulasī
twigs, he would have no rebirths. Even he who has
done a crore of sins would attain mokṣa if at the time
of cremating his dead body a piece of Tulasī twig is
placed at the bottom of the funeral pyre. Just as all
waters become pure by the union with Gaṅgā water,
all firewood is made pure by the addition of a small
piece of Tulasī twig. If the dead body of one is cre-
mated using Tulasī twigs alone, one's sins for a crore
of Kalpa years would be washed away. Yamadūtas
would keep away from one whose dead body is cre-
mated with Tulasī twigs and servants of Viṣṇu would
come near. If a light is burnt for Viṣṇu with a Tulasī
stick it would be equal to burning several lakhs of
lights for Viṣṇu. If one makes the Tulasī leaves into a
paste and smears it on one's body and then worships
Viṣṇu for one day, one would be getting the benefit of
a hundred ordinary worships and also the benefit of
doing a hundred godānas. (gifts of cows). (Chapter 24,
Padma Purāṇa).
<LEND>
