<L>7662<pc>801-a<k1>उदयन<k2>उदयन
UDAYANA¦. A renowned king of the Candravaṃśa (Lunar
dynasty).
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Genealogy.%} Descended from Viṣṇu in the following
order: Brahmā-Atri-Candra-Budha-Purūravas-Āyus-
Nahuṣa-Yayāti-Pūru-Janamejaya-Prācinvān-Pravīra-
Namasyu-Vītabhaya Śuṇḍu-Bahuvidha-Saṃyāti-Raho-
vādī-Raudrāśva-Matīnāra-Santurodha-Duṣyanta-
Bharata-Hasti-Ajamīḍha-Ṛkṣa-Saṃvaraṇa-Kuru-Jahnu-
Suratha-Viḍūratha-Sārvabhauma-Jayatsena-Ravyaya-
Bhāvuka-Cakroddhata-Devātithi-Ṛkṣa-Bhīma-Pratīpa-
Śantanu-Vyāsa-Pāṇḍu-Arjuna-Abhimanyu-Parīkṣit
Janamejaya-Śatānīka-Sahasrānīka-Udayana.
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Birth.%} There was a city called Kauśāmbī situated in
the middle of the famous kingdom known as Vatsa in
North India. The palace of king Śatānīka, born of the
family of Arjuna, was in Kauśāmbī. Viṣṇumatī was the
queen of Śatānīka. She had been childless. One day
while Śatānīka was hunting in the forest, he met with
the hermit Śāṇḍilya, by whose blessings Viṣṇumatī con-
ceived and gave birth to a son. That son was Sahas-
rānīka. When he came of age, Śatānīka left the country
with his son and went to the heaven to help the gods
in their battle with the Asuras, and he died there.
Sahasrānīka became a mighty emperor. Once he got an
invitation from Indra to go to heaven and help the
gods to fight the Asuras. After having defeated the
Asuras, one day, he was walking with Indra in the
Nandana Park, when he saw the gods playing with
their wives in the park. Immediately the unmarried
king became thoughtful and Indra read correctly, the
reason for the sudden change in the king and said to the
king. “Oh King! Don't be worried. A girl becoming
[Page801-b+ 65]
you in every aspect, is born in the world. Her name is
Mṛgāvatī.”
<div n="NI"/>Sahasrānīka was greatly pleased at this and he returned
to the earth. In the chariot there were Tilottamā and
the charioteer, with the king. The king who was deeply
immersed in thinking about Mṛgāvatī, did not attend
to the conversation of Tilottamā, who getting angry
cursed him thus:-“May you be separated for fourteen
years from the person whose thought has prevented
you from attending to what I have been telling you.”
<div n="NI"/>The king married Mṛgāvatī. She became pregnant.
One day she told the king about her desire to dip in a
pond of blood. The king got a pond ready, filled with
the juice of Lākṣā (a kind of wax, the boiled water of
which will look like blood) and such other things. Mṛgā-
vatī began to dip and splash in the pond of blood.
When she was dipping under the juice, taking her to be
a large piece of flesh, an eagle took her from the pond
and flew away. The king was overwhelmed with grief
and fell down. Then the charioteer came down from
heaven and informed the king of the curse of Tilottamā,
and then he returned.
<div n="NI"/>The eagle left Mṛgāvatī in the mount of the Rising Sun
and flew away. She cried aloud. A huge snake neared
her to swallow her. Then a divine person appeared
there and saved her from the snake and vanished. Then
a hermit-boy came there and asked the lonely woman,
clad in only one garment, about her story and took her
to the hermitage of the hermit Jamadagni who blessed
her. After some days she gave birth to a son. At that
time an unknown voice was heard saying “This boy
would become the most renowned king Udayana and
his son would become the supreme Lord of the Vidyā-
dharas.” Because he was born in the Udayādri (the
mount of the Rising Sun) he got the name Udayana.
The boy Udayana grew up in the hermitage.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Udayana to his father.%} The hermit Jamadagani who
knew the past, present and the future performed all the
rituals, necessary for a boy of Kṣatriya caste (kingly
race) such as Caula, Upanayana etc. and gave him
education in every branch of knowledge. Because of her
love and regard for her son, Mṛgāvatī put on his arm a
bangle with the name Sahasrānīka inscribed in it,
which she had been wearing so long. One day, while
Udayana was walking through the forest, he saw a
snake-charmer catching a snake. He felt sorry for the
snake. So he gave the bangle to the snake-charmer and
set the snake free. When the snake charmer was gone,
the snake told Udayana its story. That serpent was
Vasunemi, the elder brother of Vāsuki. Out of grati-
tude the serpent gave Udayana the famous Lute
Ghoṣavatī and betels and taught him the art of making
garlands and marks on the forehead which would never
fade.
<div n="NI"/>The snake-charmer took the bangle to the capital for sale.
Seeing the name of the king inscribed on it, the king's
men took him before the king. He told the king every-
thing. The king who had been suffering for the last four-
teen years form the pangs of separation, started for the
mount of the Rising Sun, without any loss of time. The
hermit Jamadagni gave him his wife Mṛgāvatī and son
Udayana. They all returned to Kauśāmbī.
<div n="NI"/>4) {%The anointment of Udayana.%} Sahasrānīka anointed his
son Udayana as the heir to his throne, and appointed
Yaugandharāyaṇa, Rumanvān and Vasantaka, the sons
[Page802-a+ 65]
of three ministers, as ministers of Udayana. At the time
of the anointment there was a shower of flowers
from the sky and an unknown voice said “With the help
of these ministers Udayana would bring the whole of
the earth under his control.” After a time Sahasrānīka
went to the Himālayas with his wife for penance.
<div n="NI"/>5). {%Vāsavadattā became Udayana's wife.%} A daughter was
born to the king of Ujjayinī. Her name was Vāsava-
dattā. Her father Caṇḍamahāsena decided to give her
in marriage to Udayana the king of Vatsa. How to
bring this to pass? Caṇḍamahāsena and Udayana had
been enemies. Finally he found out a way. It was
to entrust Vāsavadattā to Udayana (who was a great
teacher of music) for teaching her music. Ultimately he
would fall in love with her and thus Udayana would
become his son-in-law. This was the plan.
<div n="NI"/>King Caṇḍamahāsena sent a messenger to Kauśāmbī.
The messenger was sent back with a reply that, if his
daughter was sent to Kauśāmbī, he would teach her
music. Caṇḍamahāsena did not like this. So he decided
to take Udayana a prisoner somehow or other. The
king had an elephant called Naḍāgiri. He ordered for
an artificial elephant to be made equal in size to
Naḍāgiri, and placed some soldiers inside the elephant.
The artificial elephant with soldiers inside it was taken
to the great forest in the Vindhya mountain and placed
there. The men of Udayana saw this elephant and
reported it to the king. Udayana decided to see the huge
elephant which had appeared in the Vindhya. Udayana
went to the forest and saw the huge elephant standing
at a distance. The king found out a plan to catch it.
Playing mild notes on his lute, the king alone neared
the elephant. As the night was drawing and as
he was immersed in music, he did not understand that
it was an artificial elephant. As the king was nearing
the elephant it went on retreating, and thus got the
king away from his men. Then the soldiers got out of
the elephant, surrounded the king and took him a
prisoner. Thus Udayana began to live in the palace of
Caṇḍamahāsena. His work was to teach Vāsavadattā
music.
<div n="NI"/>The news reached Kauśāmbī. Yaugandharāyaṇa entrust-
ed the affairs of the government to Rumaṇvān and
started for Ujjayinī with Vasantaka. At Ujjayinī they
got Yogeśvara, a Brahmarākṣasa as friend. According
to his advice Yaugandharāyaṇa took the guise of a
mad old man. Vasantaka adopted the guise of a sick
man, suffering from pain in the stomach an uncouth
figure to look at. They entered the city. The madness of
Yaugandharāyaṇa was an entertainment to the people.
The ladies of the court liked him much. Vāsavadattā
invited the madman to the harem. Udayana instantly
recognized the mad man. Vasantaka also got admittance
to the palace. He told Vāsavadattā the story of Loha-
jaṅgha in an interesting way. (See under Lohajaṅgha)
Vāsavadattā began to be drawn more and more towards
Udayana. She seemed to have forgotten even about the
fact that her father was an enemy of Udayana, who
had been thinking seriously of means of escape from
the palace. Vāsavadattā agreed to accompany him.
Āṣādhaka got Bhadrāvatī, the elephant of Vāsavadattā,
ready for the flight. In the night Udayana and his
retinue got on the elephant Bhadrāvatī and fled from
the palace. Kāñcanamālā the maid of Vāsavadattā
also accompanied her mistress. When they had passed
[Page802-b+ 64]
the Vindhya mountain the elephant Bhadrāvatī fell
dead. When they all were standing around the dead
elephant sadly, they heard an ethereal voice saying, “Oh
King! I am a Vidyādhara woman called Māyāvatī. I
had been an elephant for so long. The son you are
going to get, will also be helped by me. Your wife
Vāsavadattā also, is a goddess, born as a woman
purposely.” Next day, all reached the palace of Udayana
and the marriage of Udayana and Vāsavadattā took
place shortly. Caṇḍamahāsena recognized that marri-
age.
<div n="NI"/>6) {%Udayana's marriage with Padmāvatī.%} Udayana spent
his days with Vāsavadattā in the harem. The ministers
Yaugandharāyaṇa, Rumaṇvān, Vasantaka and others
thought that the behaviour of the King was detrimental
to the well-being of the country. They wanted to re-
move the King from the palace for a little while and
to form an alliance with the powerful King of Magadha.
By a marriage alliance all these could be achieved. The
King of Magadha had a beautiful daughter called
Padmāvatī. The ministers began to work with this end
in view.
<div n="NI"/>Once Yaugandharāyaṇa took Udayana to the forest of
Lāvāṇaka and stayed there. It was reported to the
King of Magadha that the King of Vatsa was drawing
near to his kingdom. Fearing an attack from Udayana,
the King of Magadha began to think of concluding a
treaty with Vatsa. The King of Vatsa used to go for
hunting everyday. One day he went to a distant place
for hunting, and the minister went to the house of
Vāsavadattā and informed her of their plans. Though
it was not at all palatable to her, she gave her consent
and agreed to help them as it was meant for the well-
being of the King and the country. Accordingly,
Yaugandharāyaṇa took the guise of an old Brahmin,
Vāsavadattā that of a young Brahmin lady and Vasan-
taka that of a Brahmin celibate with only one eye.
They went to the kingdom of Magadha. Rumaṇvān
set fire to the house of Vāsavadattā and spread the
rumour that Vāsavadattā and Vasantaka had been
burnt to death. Yaugandharāyaṇa, Vāsavadattā and
Vasantaka reached Magadha. They got into the capital
and saw Padmāvatī sitting in the garden. The old
Brahmin conversed with the princess for a while. She
enquired about the young woman who was with him.
The old Brahmin replied thus:—“She is my daughter
Avantikā. Her husband has left the country. I request
you to keep her with you till I find him out and bring
him here. She may not like to be separated from her
people. So let her brother, the celibate, also be here
with her.”
<div n="NI"/>Padmāvatī took them with gladness and Yaugandharā-
yaṇa, bidding farewell, returned to the forest Lāvāṇaka.
Avantikā and the Celibate lived in the palace with
Padmāvatī. Vāsavadattā who had learned from Udayana
the art of making garlands ans marks on the forehead
which would not fade, had prepared them for Padmā-
vatī.
<div n="NI"/>The King of Vatsa returned to the forest Lāvāṇaka
and found the house of his wife burnt down to ashes.
He fell unconscious when he heard that Vāsavadattā
and Vasantaka had been burnt to death.
<div n="NI"/>The spies of the King of Magadha who were in the
forest of Lāvāṇaka, reported the rumour about the
[Page803-a+ 64]
death of Vāsavadattā and Vasantaka to their King in
Magadha, who wished to give his daughter Padmāvatī
in marriage to Udayana. The marriage proposal was
accepted by Udayana and wearing garlands and marks
that would not fade Padmāvatī entered the wedding
dais. Udayana married Padmāvatī. Yaugandharāyaṇa
made the King of Magadha take an oath that he would
go for no more aggression. Udayana and his people
reached Kauśāmbī. On the way the King happened to
see the mark on the forehead and the garland on the
neck of Padmāvatī and asked her who had made them.
Padmāvatī told the King the story of Avantikā.
Udayana was definite that Avantikā was Vāsavadattā
herself. Avantikā was brought before the King. Padmā-
vatī congratulated Vāsavadattā. Both of them loved
each other and lived together as the loving wives of
Udayana. (Kathāsaritsāgara, Lāvāṇakalambaka).
<div n="NI"/>7) {%Udayana gets a new throne.%} Once Udayana was
sitting in the court-hall, when a Brahmin came there
and made a complaint to the King that some cow-
herds had broken the legs of his son. The Brahmin
said that a boy named Devasena sat on a stone in the
forest and instantly he got kingly power. The leg of the
Brahmin boy was broken by the friends of Devasena
because he did not bow before Devasena.
<div n="NI"/>When he heard the story, the minister Yaugandharā-
yaṇa said that that place must have some peculiarities.
Accordingly the men of the King dug the place. He
got a throne of gems. (Kathāsaritsāgara, Lāvāṇakalam-
baka).
<div n="NI"/>8) {%The son of Udayana.%} Vāsavadattā became pregnant
and gave birth to a child. He was named Naravāhana-
datta. Nārada granted him a boon that Naravāhana-
datta would become the emperor of the Vidyādharas.
(See under Naravāhanadatta).
<div n="NI"/>The princess of Takṣaśilā named Kaliṅgasenā fell in
love with Udayana and she came to Kauśāmbī. But no
marriage took place. (See under Kaliṅgasenā). Nara-
vāhanadatta, the son of Udayana, married Madana-
mañcukā who was the incarnation of Rati Devī (the
wife of Madana). Udayana entrusted the country
to his son and led a life of retirement with his wives.
(Kathāsaritsāgara).
<LEND>
