<L>767<pc>091-a<k1>आर्य<k2>आर्य
ĀRYAS¦. The Ṛgveda gives us most of the information
regarding the Āryas who came to the north of India
during the times of the Vedas through the passes on
that north-western side of Bhārata. Sirdar K.M. Panikar
writing in his preface to the ‘Ṛgvedasaṃhitā’ by Poet
Vallathol summarises the information available in the
Ṛgveda about Āryan culture and says: “When the
Āryans first entered India they were rich in
cattle. They used to breed goats, dogs, donkeys, and
horses. The elephant was unknown to them. In the
Vedas the vehicle of Ind a is a horse and not an eleph-
ant. When hailing Indra they shout ‘come, come on
your horse-back’. The Veda does not say anything
about how Indra got the elephant, Airāvata, as his
vehicle. Sing to the glory of Indra against whom in
his chariot driven by two horses no enemy would dare
to face.
<div n="NI"/>The Ṛgveda gives great importance to agriculture.
Areas under cultivation were called Urvara and
‘Kṣetra’. Fields were ploughed by attaching six, eight
and even twelve bullocks to the plough. Water was taken
from hṛadas and Kulyakas (ponds and tanks) for the
purpose of irrigation. Agriculture was a very familiar
art to them. They used to cultivate all sorts of grains
and grams including yava. They conducted trade by
the exchange of goods generally. There is a reference
in one place of the use of a coin ‘Niṣka’
<div n="NI"/>The Āryas were clever in the art of leather work, wood-
work and metallurgy. They were well versed in medi-
cine also. In a sūkta of the ninth maṇḍala it is stated
that the father of a ṛṣi was a medical practitioner.
There are references to many industries also. Weav-
ing was a very important industry at that time. Cotton
cloth and woollen blankets were made by them on a
large scale. Iron was used by them with great skill.
The manufacture of armours and the descriptions about
them in Ṛgveda are ample evidence of the proficiency
of the Āryas in ironmongery and blacksmithing. Sea
voyage was not familiar to them. References to traders
cruising in boats in the Sindhu river do not give much
importance to the cruising. In food rice and ghee were
important. Meat was also relished. Rṣis wore animal
skins but others wore dhotis and shawls.
<div n="NI"/>During the Ṛgvedic times their social structure was
divided into four stages: Grāma was a colony of fami-
lies and was the nucleus of the society. A number of
gramas formed into a place called Viṣaya. A number
of Viṣayas became what was known as ‘Janam’. The
importance of Janas can be understood by the state-
[Page091-b+ 65]
ments made about Pañcajanas and the existence of
special Janas like Yādava Jana and Bhārata Jana.
<div n="NI"/>There is no wonder why the Āryas who had to live among
enemies accepted kingship. The Ṛgveda narrates the
difficulties people would have to encounter if they were
left to fight their enemies without a proper leader and
so advocates Kingship and gives it an exalted position
in their social structure. Sūkta 22, Anuvāka 12 of
Maṇḍala 10 describes the coronation of a King thus:
“I do hereby crown you as King. Come to our midst.
Rule us with courage and an unwavering mind. Let
all your subjects love you. Let thy kingdom remain
with you for ever”. The next mantra is also of the
same idea. A King is above punishment. The veda
speaks about many famous kings of which the following
are worth mentioning. Divodāsa, Sudās, Ambarīṣa,
Nahuṣa and Purūravas.
<div n="NI"/>The chief priest was always the political advisor also.
Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha were two great priests of the
Bharata dynasty. There were other priests also. Men-
tion is there about a Rājasabhā though nothing is said
about their powers or functions. It can be surmised
that the Sabhā was constituted of only men of character
and learning.
<div n="NI"/>It is interesting to note the type of domestic life in
vogue then. A father had the right, to sell his children,
To cite an example is the story of Śunaśśepha who was
made into a cow and sold to Viśvāmitra who looked
after him well. The father had the right to make his
children lose all rights over his properties. Viśvāmitra
sent out from his family fifty sons who refused to obey
him. Dowry was current then. Sūkta 11, Anuvāka 3,
Maṇḍalam 10 ordains that the bride should go to the
house of her husband after the marriage. Polygamy was
not objected to. There is a mantra to harass the co-wife
and its purpose is to make the husband more attached
to her who hates the co-wife. The originator of this
mantra was Indrāṇī, the queen of Indra. Indra had
many wives. Marriage was considered as a necessary
duty. Widow marriage was allowed.
<div n="NI"/>The Ṛgveda gives the picture of a society of people
who were always at war with each other. “We are
surrounded by mighty enemies. Help us”. This is the
slogan that rings out from the Ṛgveda.
<div n="NI"/>The Ṛgveda is a history of the Āryas. The march from
Kubhātaṭa (Kubul) to the banks of Yamunā is depict-
ed there. It was at Kubhātaṭa that the mantras were
first made. When they reach the banks of the Gaṅgā
the period of Ṛgveda ends. The crossing of each of
the five rivers of Pañcanada is treated as a big event
by the ṛṣis. When they saw the huge and deep river,
Sindhu, they were amazed. The wonder is reflected in a
lovely mantra. It was after crossing Sindhu that they had
to oppose the ‘Dasyus’. The Ṛgveda itself records that
the Dasyus were more cultured than the Āryas. Śam-
bara, a Dasyu King, was the ruler of a hundred cities.
Their fortresses were strong. They have been described
in the Ṛgveda as Aśvamayī, Āyasī and Śatabhujī.
<div n="NI"/>The chief opponents of the Āryas were a tribe of people
called Paṇis. From the Nirukta of Yāska we are given
to understand that the Paṇis were mainly engaged in
trade. The Ṛgveda names many Dasyu kings of which
the following few were more daring and brave and the
Āryas acknowledged their superior strength and courage:
Dhuni, Cumuri, Vipru, Varcis and Śambara. Among
[Page092-a+ 65]
the several divisions of the Dasyus, the Śimyus, Kīkaṭas,
Śigrus and Yakṣus ranked foremost in power. They are
described as having black colour and flat noses and
speaking a language different from that of the Āryas.
We may surmise from these facts that they belonged
to the Drāviḍa class of people. They never conducted
yāga nor did they worship gods like Indra. They were
idol worshippers for they have been abused as ‘Śiśna-
devas’. Later the Āryas learnt from the Dasyus the
worship of Śiva, Devī and Liṅga.
<div n="NI"/>Conquering these daring and cultured enemies the
Āryas reached the banks of the Yamunā to find to their
pleasant surprise a radical change in themselves. The
Bharatas settled themselves in the land between the
Yamunā and Gaṅgā and remained friendly with the
Dasyus living to the east of Gaṅgā. The Āryas who
settled down in Pañcanada were strong and to prevent
them from coming and conquering them Bharata tried
to keep them remain on the other side of Śutudri
(Sutlej). This led to a war called Dāśarājña.
<div n="NI"/>This war is to be considered as one of the most impor-
tant of wars in the world. Those who opposed Sudās
were Āryas though among the supporters of Sudās were
also Āryas. It was the people under Sudās who came
out victorious in that war and put a stop to further
conquests by the Āryas. From thereafter the Āryas
joined hands with the aborigines and laid the foundation
for the great Hindu civilization. Thereafter the Ṛgveda
states about prayers for help to combat ‘our enemies
of Āryas and Dasyus’. The gods who were recognised
later were those who were not found in the vedas of
the Āryas. The worship of Mahāyogī and Devī found
in Mohenjodaro is an evidence of this change.
<LEND>
