<L>7720<pc>806-b<k1>उन्मदा<k2>उन्मदा
UNMADĀ¦. A celestial woman.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Became a woman by the curse of Uravaśī.%} Haṃsa, the
King of Gandharvas (semi-gods) had a general of the
army called Durmada. He was a dangler. He had an
eye on Urvaśī. She was the wife of Purūravas a famous
King. On several occasions Durmada followed Urvaśī,
with lustful desire. He had expressed his amour for her
on several occasions. But Urvaśī did not pay any heed
to his words.
<div n="NI"/>One day Purūravas and Urvaśī were present in the
durbar of Indra. Purūravas and Urvaśī had signalled
a rendezvous for that night at the corner of the Nan-
dana Park. Durmada understood this. He called a
celestial woman named Unmadā to his side. They made
a plan and accordingly Unmadā disguised herself as
Urvaśī and Durmada took the guise of Purūravas and
both of them entered Nandana park. Purūravas went to
Unmadā and conjugated with her. In the same way
Urvaśī received Durmada, mistaking him for Purūravas.
After the conjugation Durmada laughed loud as if he
had played a trick on Urvaśī. Urvaśī understood every-
thing. Purūravas also arrived there. Urvaśī cursed
Durmada to take birth in the earth as a Rākṣasa and
cursed Unmadā to be born in the earth as the daughter
of a King and she said that at that time she would love
one man and become the wife of another man. The
aggrieved Durmada and Unmadā prayed for liberation
from the curse. Urvaśī gave them liberation thus:—
“This Durmada will be born as the son of Unmadā.
Seeing the death of her husband and son, she would
jump into fire. After that she will enter heaven.
Durmada will be killed by the sword of an enemy and
will obtain heaven.” According to this curse Durmada
was born as the son of Dīrghajaṅgha, the emperor of
Hiraṇyapura, under the name Pingākṣa and Unmadā
[Page807-a+ 65]
was born as the daughter of the King of Videha. Her
name was Hariṇī (Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa, Chapter 3).
<div n="NI"/>2) {%The marriage and death of Hariṇī.%} Hariṇī grew up to
be a young woman Once Piṅgākṣa growing lustful took
Hariṇī and went through the sky. She cried aloud for
a long time. Piṅgākṣa, the asura, left her in a wild
forest. At that time a King named Vasumanas came
by that way hunting. He killed Piṅgākṣa and then
having heard the story of Hariṇī got her on the horse
called Jīmūta and sent her to Videha (Mithilā). Her
father was much pleased at getting her back. He want-
ed to give her in marriage to Vasumanas. The date of
the marriage was fixed. Invitations were sent to many
Kings. Among them there was a king named Bhadra-
śreṇya, who took her by force and went away. There
was a fierce battle between the two Kings, Bhadra-
śreṇya and Vasumanas and Vasumanas was defeated. See-
ing this Divodāsa, the King of Kāśī, attacked Bhadraśre-
ṇya. Though Divodāsa defeated Bhadraśreṇya, he did
not like to harm the beaten King. So he returned to his
kingdom. Bhadraśreṇya took Hariṇī to his palace and
married her. A son was born to her and he was named
Durmada. This was the same Durmada who had
taken birth and died as Piṅgākṣa and who had been born
again as the son of Hariṇī. This Durmada took by force
the daughter of his uncle called Citrāṅgī and a child
was born to them. Bhadraśreṇya again engaged in a
battle with Divodāsa, the King of Kāśī, and was defeat-
ed. Then his son Durmada got into the battlefield and
he also was defeated.
<div n="NI"/>When all this news reached Vasumanas, the King
of Ayodhyā, he became jealous of Bhadraśreṇya. A
battle was fought between them in which Vasumanas
was defeated. But a fierce battle was fought again in
which Bhadraśreṇya and his son Durmada were killed.
Durmada obtained heaven. Stricken with grief at the
death of her husband and son, Hariṇī got into fire and
went to heaven. (Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa, Chapter 3).
<LEND>
