<L>7828<pc>815-a<k1>उत्तङ्क<k2>उत्तङ्क
UTTAṄKA¦ (UTAṄKA). An ideal disciple of Veda
who was the disciple of Āpodadhaumya.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Uttaṅka and the Guru's wife.%} After entrusting manage-
ment of the āśrama to Uttaṅka, Veda once went out
on a tour of the country, and Uttaṅka stayed in the
Āśrama carrying out the instructions of the Guru. Then
came the menstrual period of Veda's wife, and his other
wives requested Uttaṅka to do the needful, so that the
fertile period of their co-wife was not wasted. Uttaṅka's
reply to them was as follows:- “Asked by women, I
shall not do this improper act; and the preceptor has
not asked me to do such a thing though it might be
improper.”
<div n="NI"/>His Guru, Āpodadhaumya returned to the Āśrama some
time after this, and was very pleased to hear about the
above incident. He blessed Uttaṅka. (M.B. Ādī Parva,
Chapter 3).
<div n="NI"/>2) {%His tuition fee.%} His education being over, it was now
time for Uttaṅka to give due offerings—tuition fee to his
guru, and Uttaṅka enquired of the guru as to what he
would have by way of dakṣiṇā. The guru asked
Uttaṅka to get his wife's instruction in the matter and
act accordingly. Because of the aforesaid incident
(Uttaṅka not acting on the guru's wife during her
menstrual period) she had a grouse against him, and
therefore, asked him to bring as his tuition fee the ear-
rings worn by the Kṣatriya wife of King Pauṣa.
<div n="NI"/>Uttaṅka set out to procure the ear-rings. On the
way he saw an ox, and on its back a big man, who
called out to Uttaṅka to eat the excretion of the ox.
When Uttaṅka hesitated to do so, the man on the ox
asked him again to eat it, pointing out that his guru,
Veda, had done it. Then did Uttaṅka consume both
the excretion and urine of the ox, and did his oblat-
ions, in his perplexed mood, standing. Uttaṅka arrived
at the palace of King Pauṣa and told him about the
object of his visit. The King agreed to it. But, when
Uttaṅka entered the Zenana Pauṣa's Kṣatriya wife
could not be seen. When Uttaṅka told the King about
this, he remained thoughtful for some time and told
the former that he might surely have become impure
due to performance of oblations in the wrong manner,
and that his wife would not be visible, due to her
chastity, to the eyes of such impure folk. Uttaṅka
admitted to having, on his way, performed oblations
not in the proper manner, and then he sat down
facing the east after washing his hands, feet etc. and
performed oblation in the correct manner. Then did the
wife of King Pauṣa become visible to him, and she, pleas-
ed at his humility, handed over her ear-rings to him.
She also advised him to be very careful about the ear-
rings as they had once been coveted by Takṣaka, King
of the serpents. Bidding adieu to the queen, Uttaṅka
saw the King and they sat together to take food. Not
only was the rice cold; but a hair was also found in it.
Uttaṅka cursed the King and rendered him blind,
and the King, in turn, cursed Uttaṅka not to have
[Page815-b+ 64]
children. But, both of them became calm quite soon
and withdrew their curses.
<div n="NI"/>On his way back to the Āśrama with the ear-rings, he
had only just stepped into a pool for a wash, when a
naked Buddha sannyāsin, who was following him,
snatched and ran off with the ear-rings. It was really
Takṣaka disguised as the sannyāsin who thus snatched
the ear-rings. Uttaṅka chased him and caught him
when he assumed his original form of the serpent King
and disappeared into a cave. Uttaṅka waited at the
mouth of the cave stupefied, when Indra deputed his
Vajrāyudha to help Uttaṅka. The Vajrāyudha cut a
tunnel-like route to Pātāla from the earth and through
the cave Uttaṅka reached Pātāla by this route and
found out the palace of Takṣaka.
<div n="NI"/>Though Uttaṅka praised and cajoled the Nāgas (ser-
pents) their King Takṣaka did not make his appear-
ance. Uttaṅka saw there two women, who had been
weaving clothes, and on one machine there were black
and white threads. The machine had one wheel with
twelve spokes and was turned by six boys. Also was
there a horse, and a man. When Uttaṅka praised them,
the horse and the man approached him. The man
advised Uttaṅka to blow through the anus of the horse
so that the snakes could be brought round. Uttaṅka
did so, when lo! from all the pores on the body of the
horse, flames of fire began sprouting out. When the
Nāgaloka (country of serpents) got thus filled with fire
and flames, Takṣaka lost his nerves and came out with
the stolen ear-rings, which Uttaṅka received back. But,
that was the last day on which the rings had been
promised to be given to his guru's wife by Uttaṅka,
who remained there gloomy and sorrow-stricken at the
thought that he would not be able to travel all the
distance before sunset and give the ear-rings to the
guru's wife. Then the horseman gave the horse to
Uttaṅka, who reached the Āśrama just in time when
the guru's wife was about to curse Uttaṅka for not
returning with the rings though it was nearly dusk time.
Now the guru and his wife blessed Uttaṅka, who de-
tailed to them his experiences since leaving the Āśrama
in quest of the ear-rings. Then the guru spoke thus to
Uttaṅka—“The two women whom you found engaged
in weaving were Dhātā and Vidhātā, the white and
black strings, day and night, and the six boys who
turned the wheel with twelve spokes were the six
seasons. The ox seen by you on the way was Airāvata
(Indra's elephant), the horse seen in Pātāla was Agni-
deva, and the horseman, Indra. The excretion you ate
on your way was nectar and that was the reason why
you did not die in the Nāgaloka. Indra who is my
friend blessed you because of mercy towards you, my
disciple. You could bring back the ear-rings also be-
cause of Indra's blessings.”
<div n="NI"/>Then the guru blessed Uttaṅka and the latter took
leave of him. (M.B. Ādi Parva, Chapter 3).
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Uttaṅka and Janamejaya's serpent yajña.%} Uttaṅka,
determined on taking vengeance on Takṣaka, went
away directly from the āśrama to Hastināpura, where
he met Janamejaya and told him the fact that it was
Takṣaka, who had bitten to death Parīkṣit, his (Janame-
jaya) father. It was thus prompted by Uttaṅka to take
revenge upon Takṣaka that Janamejaya performed the
serpent yajña. (M.B. Ādi Parva, Chapter 3).
[Page816-a+ 65]
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Uttaṅka and Dhundhumāra.%} See under Dhundhumāra.
<div n="NI"/>5) {%Uttaṅka attained salvation.%} Uttaṅka was put up at a
place called Ujjālaka. When he became old, he went
about visiting many temples. During this tour one day
Uttaṅka saw a hunter in the forest called Gulika
attempting to steal the golden plates on the dome of
the Viṣṇu temple in Sauvīra. Gulika raised his sword to
kill Uttaṅka, when he told the former that he would
have to suffer the results of sin during many births
if he committed a sin. This admonition of Uttaṅka so
touched the heart of the hunter that he fell dead on the
spot with a repentant heart. Uttaṅka sprinkled Gaṅgā
water on the corpse of the hunter, who attained Vai-
kuṇṭha (abode of Viṣṇu). On the advice of Viṣṇu,
Uttaṅka went to Badarī where he did tapas and also
attained Vaikuṇṭha. (Nāradīya Purāṇa).
<div n="NI"/>In Chapters 53-58 of Aśvamedha Parva of Mahā-
bhārata is related the story of one Uttaṅka muni, under
the caption ‘Utaṅkopākhyāna.’ In Mahābhārata
(original) he is referred to as Uttaṅka; but in its
Malayālam rendering he is called Utaṅka. There are
no substantial differences between the story of Uttaṅka
and that of Utaṅka, Veda's disciple. But, since, there
are differences, in certain aspects some information
about the Uttaṅka of the ‘Utaṅkopākhyāna’ is given
below—
<div n="NI"/>1) {%General.%} Uttaṅka was a disciple of Gautama, the
husband of Ahalyā. The guru had more love for
Uttaṅka than for his other disciples, and therefore did
not permit the latter to leave the Āśrama even after
the other disciples were sent away. Uttaṅka became
old; wrinkles attacked his body and greyness his head.
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Tuition fee (Gurudakṣiṇā).%} Uttaṅka once returned
from the woods with firewood, in a very tired condition.
The daughter of the guru shed tears at the sight.
Gautama called Uttaṅka to him and asked him about
the cause of his grief and sorrow. Uttaṅka replied that
the hairs on his head turned grey on account of sorrow
that he was not permitted to leave the Āśrama although
it was hundred years since he had gone there first as
disciple. Then Gautama permitted Uttaṅka to quit the
Āśrama. Uttaṅka asked Gautama what he should
offer as tuition fee. Gautama consulted his wife on the
topic and she suggested as tuition fee the two ear-rings
of gems worn by the wife of King Saudāsa, who used
to eat the flesh of man. Immediately Uttaṅka set out
to fetch the ear-rings and on his way met Saudāsa in
the forest, and told the latter about his mission. Sau-
dāsa tried to eat Uttaṅka, who told him that he was
in duty bound to obtain the ear-rings for his guru's
wife and that, after fulfilling the mission, he would
return to Saudāsa to be eaten up by him. Saudāsa
agreed to the proposition. He directed Uttaṅka to his
wife Madayantī, who spoke to him thus—“Devas and
Maharṣis covet these ear-rings. If I place them on the
ground, serpents will steal them; if handed over to
Ucchiṣṭa, Yakṣas will steal them, and if the watchman
sleeps, Devas will snatch them off. Therefore, you
should bring some token for me to believe that you are
deputed by my husband.” Accordingly Uttaṅka went
back to Saudāsa and returned to his wife with a token
from him, and Madayantī handed over her ear-rings to
Uttaṅka. Being told by Saudāsa that Uttaṅka need
not return again to him, Uttaṅka started for Gautama's
āśrama with the ear-rings. Feeling hungry on the way,
[Page816-b+ 65]
Uttaṅka tied to the branch of a vilva tree the ear-rings
bundled in deer skin and ate vilva fruits. Just then the
bundle of deer skin got untied and the ear-rings kept in
it fell on the ground. A serpent carried off the rings
between its teeth and concealed itself in a mole-hill.
Highly grieved and upset by the sight, Uttaṅka fell
down from the tree. For 35 days Uttaṅka dug the mole-
hill. Then Indra felt great sympathy for him, appear-
ed on the spot, and passed his Vajrāyudha through the
mole-hill. Then the earth burst open and Uttaṅka
entered Pātāla through the opening, and a horse, its
tail white and the rest of the body black in colour
presented itself to him. It asked Uttaṅka to blow
through its anus. Uttaṅka did so and the Nāgaloka
was filled with flames of fire. (The horse was Agnideva).
Then did the serpents return the ear-rings to Uttaṅka,
who returned with it to Gautama and presented it to
him (Gautama) as tuition fee.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Uttaṅka about to curse Śrī Kṛṣṇa.%} Uttaṅka once went
to Dvārakā, and during their talk was about to curse
Kṛṣṇa for not attempting to bring about a compromise
between the Kauravas and the Pāṇḍavas. At once
Kṛṣṇa exhibited his Viśvarūpa (himself as containing
the whole universe). Thereupon Uttaṅka saluted Kṛṣṇa,
who asked him to request for any boon. He prayed for
the boon that water might be made available in any
desert he visited. Kṛṣṇa told him that whenever he
required water he might successfully think of him.
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Indra tested Uttaṅka.%} Some time afterwards, while
roaming about quite thirsty and tired in a desert,
Uttaṅka thought about Kṛṣṇa, and at once there ap-
peared before him a naked Caṇḍāla, his body covered
with mud. Dogs encircled him. Uttaṅka hesitated to
drink the water given to him by this Caṇḍāla, who had
some water with him. The Caṇḍāla again insisted on
Uttaṅka drinking the water, but he again refused the
offer. The caṇḍāla then disappeared with the dogs.
Within a few minutes a person with disc, conch, club
etc. about him appeared, and Uttaṅka recognised him
as Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Uttaṅka told Kṛṣṇa that it was not
proper to give water to a brahmin through a caṇḍāla.
Kṛṣṇa's reply to this was as follows:—“I asked Indra to
give you nectar instead of water, and he argued that it
was not proper that men should be given nectar. I
pleaded for you again. Indra replied to this that he
himself would, in the guise of a caṇḍāla give nectar to
you, and he should not be found fault with, if you
refused the nectar. I accepted that proposition of his.
But, you did not accept nectar thus offered to you. So,
you cannot be given nectar now. But, there will appear
water-laden clouds in deserts which you traverse, which
would be known as ‘Uttaṅka clouds’ and they would
give you sweet water.
<div n="NI"/>Uttaṅka was pleased, and it is the Uttaṅka clouds,
which form as per the above orders of Kṛṣṇa that cause
rain to fall, though rarely, in deserts even today.
<LEND>
