<L>784<pc>093-a<k1>आश्रम<k2>आश्रम
ĀŚRAMA¦. Asramites (Inmates of an Āśrama) have to pass
through four stages. The four stages of Brahmacarya,
Gārhasthya, Vānaprastha and Sannyāsa are known as
the four Āśramas. Viṣṇu Purāṇa, Part III, Chapter 9
describes each of the Āśramas as follows:
<div n="NI"/>1. {%Brahmacarya.%} “After Upanayana a boy should
maintain a Brahmacārī's vrata, engage himself in the
study of the Vedas, suppress his indriyas (the five
senses) and live in the house of the preceptor. Living
there with proper observance of śauca, customs and
vratas he should serve and attend on the Guru. The
study of Vedas should be with proper observance of
Vratas and steady attention. A Brahmacārī should
worship with concentration, the Sun and Agni at the
time of the two sandhyās (dawn and dusk) and after
that he should do obeisance to the Guru. When the Guru
stands, he should also be standing. When the guru walks,
he should walk behind him and when he sits, he should
sit in a lower position. The Śiṣya (disciple-pupil) should
not do anything against the guru. When the guru him-
self asks, the Śiṣya should sit in front of him and recite
Vedas without attending to anything else. After that,
with his permission he may eat food which has been
got by begging. The Śiṣya may take his bath in the
water only after the Ācārya (guru) has taken his bath
in it. Everyday the Camata, darbha, water and flowers
which the guru needs, must be brought and supplied
(by the Śiṣya).
<div n="NI"/>2. {%Gārhasthya.%} After the study of the Vedas the intelli-
gent śiṣya gives Gurudakṣiṇā (Payment to the precep-
tor) and with the consent of the Guru, enters into
Gṛhasthāśrama. Then he is to marry and by earning
money from a suitable occupation, should fulfil all
obligations of a Gṛhastha according to his capacity.
The Gṛhastha who worships the Pitṛs with Piṇḍadāna
(offerings of rice balls), Devas with Yāgas (sacrifices),
Ṛṣis with Svādhyāya (self discipline), Prajāpatis with
begetting of children, spirits with bali (offering of food
etc.) and the whole world with love, attains the holy
world by his own virtuous deeds. Gṛhasthāśrama is the
only source of support for sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs
who beg their food. Therefore feeding them is an act
of nobility. Brāhmaṇas travel from country to country
[Page093-b+ 65]
to study Vedas, for pilgrimage and for seeing the places.
The Gṛhastha is the only refuge and support of those
who are homeless, who do not carry their food with
them and those who spend the night wherever they
reach. If such people come to his house, the Gṛhastha
should welcome them with kind and loving words, and
give them bed, seat and food. The guest who leaves a
house disappointed, is really departing after transfer-
ring his own sins to that householder and taking away
all the virtuous deeds of the householder. It is not
proper for the Gṛhastha to treat a guest with disrespect,
to behave rudely or treacherously towards him, to regret
what has been given to the guest, or to obstruct or
rebuke him. The Gṛhastha who performs the supreme
duty of Gṛhasthāśrama in this way properly, is liberated
from all secular bonds and reaches the noblest worlds.
<div n="NI"/>3. {%Vānaprastha.%} After having finished all his duties in
this way, to his satisfaction, the Gṛhastha, with the
commencement of old age, should go to the forest, either
after entrusting his wife to his sons or taking her also
with him. There, he should use leaves, roots and fruits
for his food, grow hair and beard, sleep on the bare
ground, lead the life of a tāpasa and receive and honour
all classes of guests. His clothes, sheets and blankets
should be of deer-skin and darbha grass. The rule is
that he should bathe three times a day. Worship of gods,
performing homas, hospitality to all guests, mendicancy
-all these are the laudable features of Vānaprastha.
Any oil that is available in the forest is to be used for
his oil bath. Enduring heat and cold, performing tapas,
are also his duties. The Muni who observes this rule in
Vānaprastha with due austerity, burns up all his evils as
with fire and attains the eternal worlds.
<div n="NI"/>4. {%Sannyāsa.%} The fourth Āśrama is that of the Sannyāsī.
Before entering upon the fourth Āśrama one has to
renounce the love of travel, wealth and wife and also
give up all spirit of rivalry. One who embraces sann-
yāsa should abandon completely the efforts for the
three Puruṣārthas of Dharma, Artha and Kāma, treat
friends and foes alike and continue to love all living
beings. Not even a single creature should be offended
by thought, word or deed. Conquering all passions,
the Sannyāsī should renounce all bonds and attach-
ments. He should not stay in a village more than one
night and in a town more than five nights. Even that
should be in such a way that no one feels any love or
hatred towards him. For sustaining life, he should go
about begging food from the houses of the people of
the three castes—Brahmins, Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas. It
should be after all people have taken their food and
put out the cooking fire. The Sannyāsī should cast
away all vices like Kāma, Krodha, Garva, Lobha, and
Moha and should not have any thought of self in any-
thing. The Muni who goes about giving shelter to all
creatures will not have to fear any creature. The
Brāhmaṇa who follows the Sannyāsāśrama as described
above with a pure heart and without difficulty will
shine like fire without fuel and attain Brahmaloka in
peace.
<LEND>
