<L>7853<pc>818-a<k1>वाग्भट<k2>वाग्भट
VĀGBHAṬA¦. A Sanskrit scholar who lived in the 12th
century A.D. He is the author of the two medical
books ‘Aṣṭāṅga-saṅgraha’ and ‘Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya’. Another
work called ‘Neminirvāṇa’ is also written by Vāgbhaṭa.
This work deals with the story of Neminātha, a Jain
hermit.
<div n="NI"/>Not much is known about Vāgbhaṭa. He was a scholar
in rhetorical science. There are certain stories about
his writing the medical books. It was a period when the
Muslims had beaten down the Brahmins. They had
taken away the medical science also from them. The
Brahmins considered this to be a disgrace to them. They
decided to select an intelligent boy and send him to a
Muslim physician. They selected Vāgbhaṭa. The Brah-
mins disguised Vāgbhaṭa as a Muslim boy and sent him
to the Muslim Physician on the other side of the river.
The boy went to the physician and told him that he
was coming from far away with the intention of learning
medical science. The teacher put certain questions
and understood that the boy possessed extraordinary
intelligence. He began to teach the boy the science
of medicine. Seeing the interest of the boy the teacher
asked the boy to eat food from his house and to learn
day and night. The Brahmin boy did not like to eat
the food of Muslims. The boy said that he had a relative
on the other side of the river and that he would go
there and have his supper and return for the night study.
The teacher agreed and thenceforward Vāgbhaṭa
began to learn day and night. Within a short time he
completed learning.
<div n="NI"/>One day the teacher was sleeping on the seventh storey
of the building and his disciple Vāgbhaṭa was massag-
ing his legs. The boy soliloquised that fate had destined
him to massage the legs of a Musalman. Instantly he
cried bitterly, and the teacher awoke and understood
that the boy was not a Muslim, and tried to cut his
head. The boy thought: “The four Vedas and the six
Śāstras say that there is a god. If it is true no harm
will come to me.” Then he jumped out of the window.
In consequence of this jump, he became a little lame
and no other harm befell him. He swam across the
river and reached the other side and told the Brahmins
everything. The Brahmins asked him what he imagined
when he jumped from the seventh storey. He replied
“I jumped with this imagination. The four Vedas and
the six Śāstras say that there is a god. If it is true no
harm will come to me.” As soon as the boy had finish-
ed the Brahmins became angry and they all got up.
They said “You went wrong in using the doubtful ‘if’,
instead of the affirmative ‘As.’ The Brahmins joined
together and expelled him from the society. The boy
thought of going away somewhere. “But there won't be
another chance for somebody else to go and learn
medical science from the Muslim physicians. So before
going away from here I must make the fruits of my
efforts available to these people.” Thinking so he lived
there for a little longer. He lived there without ming-
ling with the Brahmins, cooking his food. It is believed
that Vāgbhaṭa wrote ‘Aṣṭāṅgasaṅgraha’ and ‘Aṣṭāṅga-
hṛdaya,’ during this period.
<LEND>
