<L>788<pc>094-a<k1>आस्तीक<k2>आस्तीक
ĀSTĪKA¦. The son of the Maharṣi Jaratkāru and his wife,
also named Jaratkāru. He stopped King Janamejaya's
Sarpasatra and saved the nāgas.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Birth.%} There is a story about Āstīka's birth in the
Devī Bhāgavata. Long ago the people of the world were
so much troubled by the serpents, that they sought pro-
tection from Kaśyapa Prajāpati. To find a remedy for
this, Kaśyapa discussed the matter with Brahmā. To
put an end to the troubles from the serpents, Brahmā
suggested that a number of mantras and a deity as the
basis of those mantras should be created. Accordingly
Kaśyapa created many mantras and Manasā Devī as the
basic deity of those mantras. She is named “Manasā-
devī” because Kaśyapa created her by his mental
power. Manasādevī has eleven other names also, name-
ly Jaratkāru, Jagatgaurī, Siddhayoginī, Vaiṣṇavī, Nāga-
bhaginī, Śaivī, Nāgeśvarī, Jaratkārupriyā, Āstīkamātā,
Viṣaharā and Mahājñānayutā.
<div n="NI"/>Manasādevī (Jaratkāru) when quite young, went to
Kailāsa for doing tapas (penance). There she did tapas
to Śiva for a thousand years. At last Śiva appeared and
blessed her with divine wisdom. She returned with
great learning and devotion. (Devī Bhāgavata, Navama
Skandha).
<div n="NI"/>At that time, a Muni (sage) named Jaratkāru, when
travelling through the forest happened to see his pitṛs
(souls of forefathers) hanging over a precipice at
the end of a blade of grass. They were hanging preca-
riously at the end of a reed grass, head downwards,
about to fall into the abyss. Jaratkāru enquired why
they were lying in that condition. They explained that
they were in that plight because their descendant
Jaratkāru had no children. As he is a bachelor there
is no hope either, of his having any issue. Since he
has no children, we will not get to heaven, they added.
To save the Pitṛs from their predicament, Jaratkāru
decided to marry. But he wished to marry a woman
who had the same name as his. Once Vāsuki met
Jaratkāru and told him that he had a sister named
Jaratkāru and that he would be very happy if Jaratkāru
married her. Jaratkāru accepted the offer readily and
married Jaratkāru.
<div n="NI"/>After their marriage, while they were living together
in a place called Puṣkara tīrtha, an unexpected event
happened which interrupted the happy course of their
life. One evening, the husband was sleeping with his
head in the wife's lap, under a tree. The sun was about
to set. As the Maharṣi did not wake up before sunset, the
wife became anxious. It is believed that he who does not
wake up before sunrise and he who does not offer pray-
ers at dusk will be guilty of the sin of Brahmahatyā (kill-
ing a Brahmin). Nor was it proper to wake him up from
a sound sleep. But in the end, she did wake him up.
The husband sprang up in great fury. He renounced
the wife then and there. Weeping bitterly, she begged
for his forgiveness. At last Jaratkāru relented and
told her: “You will have a very noble, brilliant, re-
nowned, virtuous, scholarly and devout son who will be
a devotee of Viṣṇu and a preserver of the family”.
After this Manasādevī set out to Kailāsa. When she
reached there Parama-Śiva and Pārvatī comforted her.
<div n="NI"/>Manasādevī was pregnant. The precepts and spiritual
advice given by Jaratkāru, Parama-Śiva and Pārvatī
were heard by the child in the womb and so even before
his birth he became a Jñānī and a yogī. In due course
[Page094-b+ 65]
Manasādevī gave birth to a son who was a part of
Nārāyaṇa (Viṣṇu). Since he was the son of Manasā-
devī who had deep devotion to the Guru and to the
Gods, the boy was named Āstīka.
<div n="NI"/>The Mahābhārata, Ādi Parva, gives another reason for
giving this name to the boy. When the sage Jaratkāru
abandoned his wife, he had blessed her saying that the
child in her womb would be a brilliant and devoted
son. That is why this boy came to be called Āstīka.
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Boyhood%} Āstīka was taught Veda, Vedāṃgas etc.
by Parama-Śiva himself. After receiving the blessings
of Parama-Śiva, Āstīka went to Puṣkara tīrtha and did
tapas to Viṣṇu for many years. Having received Viṣṇu's
blessings also, he returned to Kailāsa. After living there
happily with his mother for some time, one day they
started to the Āśrama of Kaśyapa Prajāpati, the
father of Manasādevī. Kaśyapa was very much pleased
to see his noble-hearted daughter and her brilliant
son. To enhance the fame and accomplishments of
the boy Kaśyapa gave a sumptuous feast to ten crores
of Brahmins. (Devī Bhāgavata, Navama Skandha).
<div n="NI"/>Vāsuki was Manasādevī's brother. Āstīka grew up
there under the care of Vāsuki. It was Cyavana Muni
who taught Sāṃgavedas to Āstīka, at this time. (M.B.,
Ādi Parva, Chapter 48, Verse 18).
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Āstīka at the Sarpasatra.%} Once King Parīkṣit, the
son of Abhimanyu was travelling through the forest for
hunting animals. He picked up a dead snake with the
tip of his bow and put it on the shoulder of a sage
named “Śamīka”. Śamīka's son, Śṛṃgī came to know
of this. In his anger, Śṛṃgī pronounced a curse that
King Parīkṣit should die within seven days by the bite
of Takṣaka. When Parīkṣit heard of this, he had a
palace built on a single pillar in the middle of the
ocean, quite inaccessible to Takṣaka and took shelter
there. The most famous physicians and wizards were
engaged to ward off the approach of Takṣaka to that
place. Six days passed like this. On the seventh day,
determined to make a final attempt, Takṣaka disguised
himself as an old Brāhmaṇa and set out to the King's
place of shelter. On his way he met Dhanvantari who
was proceeding to Parīkṣit to protect him. They be-
came friends and as a result of it, Dhanvantari returned
after receiving a large number of rare precious stones
given to him by Takṣaka. Assuming the form of a small
worm, Takṣaka secretly entered into a fruit which was
to be presented to the King. As soon as the King took
that fruit in his hand, Takṣaka took his own shape
and size and bit the King who died immediately.
Janamejaya was the son of this King Parīkṣit.
<div n="NI"/>Janamejaya performed all the obsequies of his father.
After that, in a spirit of revenge, with the object of
annihilating the whole race of serpents, he summoned
Brāhmaṇas to conduct a sarpa satra (snake sacrifice).
<div n="NI"/>In the sacrificial fire specially prepared at that yāga,
many serpents were being burnt up. It seemed that the
whole race of serpents would shortly be wiped out.
But Takṣaka alone was not to be seen. The officiating
priests were beginning to get angry. Impatient cries
of Where is Takṣaka rent the air. The frightened
Takṣaka fled for life to the palace of his friend Indra
and there lay down, curling round Indra's cot. When
the priests understood this they decided to use their
charms and mantras which would bring Indra, his bed,
cot and all, along with Takṣaka to the sacrificial fire.
[Page095-a+ 65]
At this stage, all the gods rushed to Manasādevī and
fell at her feet and begged her to save the situation.
The kindhearted Devī called her son Āstīka and advis-
ed him to persuade Janamejaya to stop the sarpa-
satra. Āstīka went to Janamejaya and requested him
to give him the lives of Takṣaka and Indra as a gift.
Janamejaya, after consulting the munis and priests
and at their advice, agreed to do so. In this way, the
Sarpasatra was stopped and the remaining serpents
escaped with their lives. (Devī Bhāgavata, Navama
Skandha, M.B., Ādi Parva).
<LEND>
