<L>8025<pc>828-a<k1>वररुचि<k2>वररुचि
VARARUCI¦. An ancient Indian scholar in astronomy
and astrology. (Some details regarding Vararuci are
given under Bhartṛhari).
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Birth.%} It is stated in Kathāsaritsāgara, Kathāpīṭha-
lambaka, Taraṅga 1, that Vararuci was the rebirth of
a Gaṇanāyaka (guard of Śiva) named Puṣpadanta.
Once Śiva happened to tell Pārvatī some previous
stories of the Vidyādharas. Puṣpadanta eavesdropped
and heard everything. Pārvatī understood this and
cursed him to become a man. Accordingly Puṣpadanta
was born in the city of Kauśāmbī under the name
Vararuci or Kātyāyana. (For details about the curse
see under Guṇāḍhya).
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Of sharp intelligence.%} Vararuci was born as the son
of the Brahmin Somadatta at Kauśāmbī. Agni-
śikha was another name of Somadatta. Vasudattā
was the mother of Vararuci. In the previous birth,
Vasudattā was a hermit maid. Due to a curse she
lost her hermit-maidhood and took birth as a woman
under the name Vasudattā and became the wife of
Somadatta.
<div n="NI"/>As his father died in his childhood, Vararuci was
brought up by his mother. She was in great penury
after the death of her husband. One day two travellers
came to her house. While they were sitting on the
veranda, the sound of a conch was heard. Then the
mother called Vararuci and said to him. “Son, the
dance of Nanda, the friend of your father, is about to
begin.” Vararuci requested his mother to let him go
to the temple and see the dance so that he might learn
it. Hearing this, the guests were amazed. How can
one learn dance by seeing only once? That was the
doubt in the minds of the travellers. “Vararuci could
learn anything by hearing only once,” his mother
said. As a test, they recited to him a portion from the
Vedas. Vararuci repeated the portion to them without
any mistake. After this the guests took the boy and
[Page828-b+ 65]
showed him the dance and brought him back. The boy
performed every item of the dance he saw, before the
guests. They were immensely pleased.
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Getting a teacher.%} The guests had actually been
searching for a boy who could understand anything at
the first hearing. There was reason for it.
<div n="NI"/>In the great city of Nandarāja, there was a great
Brahmin named Śaṅkarasvāmī. He had two sons
named Varṣa and Upavarṣa. Both married and lived in
separate houses. By and by Varṣa became cruel and
wicked and poor. Upavarṣa became learned and
wealthy. The rainy season approached. In those days
it was a custom for women to make a sweet food of rice
flour with sugar and give it to cruel Brahmins. It was
to prevent the extreme cold in the winter and the ex-
treme heat in the summer from affecting them severely.
The wife of Upavarṣa made this sweet food and gave it
to Varṣa. When he brought it home, his wife scolded
him. Varṣa felt very sorry because of his foolishness.
He gave up all his desires and began to worship
Kumārasvāmī. Kumārasvāmī was pleased with him
and blessed him with all kinds of knowledge. Kumāra-
svāmī had ordered him to teach all of this knowledge
to one who could learn at first hearing. From that day
onwards Varṣa had been waiting for a disciple who
could learn at first hearing.
<div n="NI"/>During this period there lived two Brahmins named
Devasvāmī and Karambhaka in the city of Vetasapura.
They were friends. A son was born to each of them.
The son of Devasvāmī was named Vyālī. The name of
the son of Karambhaka was Indradatta. When Vyālī
was a child, his father died. Seeing their grief the
father of Indradatta left the country. Both of the boys,
having nobody to look after them, went to perform
penance, before Subrahmaṇyasvāmī. Subrahmaṇya
ordered them in their sleep to go to Varṣa in Pāṭalikā,
the city of King Nanda, and to learn every thing from
him. The boys immediately went to the city of King
Nanda and enquired about the teacher Varṣa. The
people told them that Varṣa was a fool. They were
sorry to hear it. Still they did not turn back. They
reached the house of Varṣa, and entered the house which
was the abode of rats and bats, the walls of which were
crumbling due to rain as it had not been thatched for
a long time. The courtyard was full of Cassiatora
plants. Inside the house, here and there on the floor,
Cyperus-grass was growing. The wife of Varṣa who was
in utter penury stood up and welcomed them. She told
them about her husband. “He is waiting for a disciple
who would learn everything at first hearing.” Vyālī
and Indradatta agreed to bring such a disciple and
they started on a journey in search of such a boy. They
were the two travellers who came to the house of
Vararuci.
<div n="NI"/>Vyālī said all about these things to the mother of
Vararuci. She was very glad and said. “Everything
fits well. At the birth of my son, an ethereal
voice said: “At first hearing he will learn every-
thing. He will learn everything from the teacher
Varṣa. He will publish works in grammar and astro-
nomy.” If he has interest in good things he will get the
name Vararuci. So I had been thinking how and where
to find this teacher Varṣa.”
<div n="NI"/>Next morning, with the permission of his mother,
Vararuci started for the house of Varṣa, with Vyālī and
[Page829-a+ 65]
Indradatta. They reached the house of Varṣa. Next
morning they smeared and purified the floor and the
three sincere and simple disciples sat facing the east.
The teacher Varṣa recited to them the divine spell
‘Om,’ and instantly all the Vedas and the ancillaries of
Vedas made their appearance. The teacher commenced
teaching. The three disciples learned, Vararuci
hearing only once, Vyālī hearing twice and Indradatta
hearing thrice. Hearing these divine recitations and
repetitions which were not to be heard anywhere else,
Brahmins crowded to the place. King Nanda of
Pāṭalīputra praised the teacher Varṣa and sent him
plenty of wealth and conferred on him ranks and
privileges.
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Marriage.%} Vararuci learned everything from the
teacher Varṣa. He went with his friends once to see
the Indra-festival. There, Vararuci happened to see
Upakośā the daughter of Upavarṣa and fell in love
with her. That night he did not sleep. At last he slow-
ly closed his eyes. A divine woman clad in white
garments appeared before him It seemed to him that
the woman said to him. “You need not worry in this
matter. Upakośā was your wife in the previous birth.
She will marry only you. I am Sarasvatī who pervades
your body.” Vararuci woke up. Next day the elders
came to know of this, and gave her in marriage to
Vararuci.
<div n="NI"/>5) {%Vararuci becoming a Minister.%} Education was finished.
It was time for Vyālī and Indradatta to give presents
to the teacher Varṣa. The teacher demanded a crore
of Vilkas (a Venetian ducat used for neck-ornament).
They were not having so much wealth. They went
with Vararuci to Nanda, the King of Ayodhyā, and the
Brother-in-law of Vararuci. When they reached Ayodhyā,
they heard that the King had just died. Indradatta
said “By the practice of contemplation I shall enter the
body of the King. Vararuci should come and beg money
of me. Till my return Vyālī must keep my body.”
<div n="NI"/>“The spirit of Indradatta immediately entered the
King's body. The dead King rose up. People were
struck with wonder. They celebrated a festival. Vyālī
kept the body of Indradatta within a temple. Vararuci
went to the presence of the King and begged for a
crore of Vilkas. The King called his minister Śakaṭāla
and told him to give Vararuci a crore of Vilkas.
Śakaṭāla, who was an intelligent man, felt some doubt
in the coming to life of the King. He decided that some
one might have entered the body of the King. He
ordered that every dead body in the city should be
burnt. Along with the bodies, the body of Indradatta
also was taken by force from Vyālī. At this time the
King compelled Śakaṭāla to give the beggar Vilkas.
But till the dead bodies were burnt, Śakaṭāla did not
obey him. Because his body was burnt Indradatta had
to remain in the body of the King. Śakaṭāla gave Vara-
ruci the required amount. But of what use was the
money? Indradatta had become the King. The King
and Vyālī made a secret consultation, as a result of
which Vararuci was made the Prime Minister. Śakaṭāla
was charged with Brahmahatyā and was put into a
dungeon with his hundred sons. They were allowed
fried and powdered grain and a ‘ceratu’ (a measure)
of water as food for each.
<div n="NI"/>Śakaṭāla said to his sons. “My sons, all of us cannot
live with so little food. The most intelligent one among
[Page829-b+ 65]
us should live by eating the whole food, to take revenge
on the Yoga Nanda King. Who will do so?”
<div n="NI"/>Sons:—We don't think that we are powerful to do that.
<div n="NI"/>So you must live, father!
<div n="NI"/>So Śakaṭāla ate the whole food and lived while his sons,
one by one, died of hunger before his eyes. Śakaṭāla
sat in the middle of the Skeletons with the sole purpose
of taking revenge. Vyālī gave the present to the teacher
and went home.
<div n="NI"/>Indradatta and Vararuci lived as king and minister.
<div n="NI"/>6) {%Loss of ministership.%} By and by Indradatta had fallen
into bad ways. The subjects were beset with famine.
The people hated the king and the minister. They made
a cry to bring Śakaṭāla back. They obtained the per-
mission of the king and brought Śakaṭāla out of the
dungeon. Śakaṭāla knew that so long as Vararuci was
alive, he could do nothing to the King Yoga Nanda. So
he decided to wait for an opportunity, and accepted
an office under Vararuci. One day Yoga Nanda went
out for a walk. He saw in the Ganges the palm of a
hand with five fingers. He called Vararuci and asked
him what the sight was. Vararuci showed two fingers
in that direction. Immediately the palm of the hand
disappeared. The King was amazed at this and asked
him for its meaning. He said “The meaning of showing
fingers was that if five men unite together, they could
accomplish anything. I showed two fingers, to mean that
if two men unite together they also could achieve any-
thing.” At this reply the king was much pleased and
Śakaṭāla felt miserable at the intelligence of Vararuci.
<div n="NI"/>On another occasion the King saw his wife looking at a
Brahmin guest through the window. He got angry and
ordered that Brahmin to be killed. When that Brahmin
was being taken to the scaffold, a dead fish, placed for
sale, laughed loud. The king asked Vararuci for its
reason. Saying that he had to consider about it before
giving a reply, he went out and meditated upon Sara-
svatī. Devī appeared and told him. “If you climb up to
the top of this palm tree and sit there to night you will
understand why the dead fish laughed.” Vararuci did
as he was told. A fierce giantess came there with her
young ones. The children began to ask her for food.
The giantess told them that they would get the flesh of
a Brahmin next day, and that he was not killed that day
because the dead fish had laughed. The young ones
asked her why the dead fish laughed. The giantess said
“The wives of the kings are not chaste. In all harems
men live in the guise of women. Without stopping this
the king was going to kill an innocent Brahmin. That
is why the dead fish laughed.”
<div n="NI"/>Vararuci, who heard this conversation, got down when
the giantess was gone. He went to the king and told
him why the fish laughed. The king made a sudden
search in the harem. He found out some men in the
dress of women. The king honoured Vararuci and
released the Brahmin. One day an artist who drew
portraits, came to the palace. He drew a portrait of
the king and the queen and placed it before the king.
The picture was life-like. The king gave the artist
several presents. Once Vararuci happened to enter the
bed-room of the king. He saw the picture on the wall.
The picture was beautiful. Still, considering the appear-
ance of each part of her body the queen ought to have
a mole on her loin. Vararuci put that mole in the
picture. When Vararuci had gone the king entered the
[Page830-a+ 65]
room and saw the mole in the picture. The king asked his
servant, who that person was who had put that mole in
the picture. He replied that it was Vararuci. The king
thought that Vararuci had nocturnal connections with
the queen. Perhaps it was in this way that Vararuci
found out men in the dress of women. The king called
Śakaṭāla to him and told him to kill Vararuci secretly.
Śakaṭāla felt pity on Vararuci and hid him in a place.
Vararuci told Śakaṭāla “No body can kill me. My
friend is a giant. He will come to me the moment
think of him. If I tell him he will swallow the whole
world.” When he heard this, Śakaṭāla desired to see
the giant. Vararuci thought of him and the giant
appeared. Śakaṭāla was terribly afraid of the giant.
Vararuci made him disappear. Śakaṭāla asked him how
he got the friendship of the giant. Vararuci replied.
<div n="NI"/>“While you were in the dungeon, a city chief was disap-
pearing daily from this city. The king asked me to find
out the reason. One night, while I was walking through
the city, I saw this giant. He asked me. “Who is the
most beautiful woman in this city?” I replied “Whoever
falls in love with a woman, to him, that woman is the
most beautiful. You who do not know this principle,
are a fool.” The giant had no answer. He said “You
alone have defeated me. I am glad of it. The moment
you think of me I will come and help you.” Saying
this the giant disappeared. Thenceforward we became
friends.”
<div n="NI"/>Śakaṭāla felt great respect for Vararuci. Hiraṇyagupta,
the son of Yoga Nanda, went for hunting. His horse ran
fast and he was separated from his army and got into
a deep forest far away. He ate some fruits and plums
and got on a tree to rest for the night. At that time a
lion chased a bear, which climbed on the same tree.
The prince trembled with fear. The bear said “Do not
fear. I am your friend.” Both talked for a while and
became fast friends. Shortly, the prince began to sleep.
The lion asked the bear to push that man down. The
bear said that he would not deceive his friend. The dis-
appointed lion sat under the tree. Then the bear slept
and Hiraṇyagupta sat awake. The lion asked the prince
to push the bear down. Thinking that he could save
his life by complying with the request of the lion, he
pushed the bear down. Fortunately the hold of the bear
was firm and so it did not fall. The bear cursed Hiraṇya-
gupta. “May you become mad.” The king was very
sorry when his son returned a mad man. The king
repented that he had killed Vararuci. For this was the
time when the king needed him most.
<div n="NI"/>Śakaṭāla went to the presence of the king and said that
Vararuci was still alive. In accordance with the order
of the king, Śakaṭāla brought Vararuci. The king
showed him his mad son. By the blessing of Sarasvatī,
Vararuci understood that the prince had deceived his
friend, and informed the king of what had happened.
Immediately the prince was cured of his madness. Yoga
Nanda asked Vararuci, how he knew the cause of the
madness of the prince. He replied. “A man of intelli-
gence can understand anything by symptoms and in-
ference.” He also said that in this way he knew about
the mole of the queen. When the king heard this he
bowed down his head.
<div n="NI"/>After this Vararuci left the palace. He did not stop to
accept the favours of the king. Nor did he pay any heed
to the compulsion of the king to stay. He reached his
[Page830-b+ 65]
house. Everybody who saw Vararuci began to cry. Not
knowing the reason, he stood dumbfounded. Upavarṣa
came to him and said that when the news about the
slaughter of Vararuci reached home, Upakośā got in-
to fire and his mother died of broken heart. The grief-
stricken Vararuci went to the forest for penance.
<div n="NI"/>After this Śakaṭāla waited for an opportunity to bring
Indradatta (Yoga Nanda) down. Once he had been
walking out side the city when he saw a Brahmin dig-
ging a pit. Śakaṭāla asked him why he was digging the
pit. He replied “I stumbled on this Darbha grass. So
I am rooting it out.” Śakaṭāla resolved to make use of
this Brahmin to achieve his purpose. His name was
Cāṇakya. Śakaṭāla took Cāṇakya to the palace. A
ceremony of offerings to the manes was being conducted
in the Palace. Another Brahmin named Subandhu
also came there. The king ordered ‘agrabhojana’ (first
meal) to be given to Subandhu. Cāṇakya trembled
with fury. At that time his lock of hair was loosened.
He took a vow that only after pacifying his anger by
killing Yoga Nanda within seven days, would he tie up
his lock. Cāṇakya began practising sorcery against the
king. The king caught burning fever and died on the
seventh day. Śakaṭāla killed Hiraṇyagupta. After this
Sakaṭāla made Candragupta, the son of the real Nanda
who died earlier, the king. Making Cāṇakya his minis-
ter, Śakaṭāla went for penance.
<div n="NI"/>7) {%Sons.%} See under Pākkanār.
<div n="NI"/>8) {%The end.%} Vararuci began to perform penance in the
Vindhya mountain. At that time a brahmin came to
the hermitage of Vararuci. He informed Vararuci of
the death of Yoga Nanda. Thinking about the littleness
of the pleasures of the world, he began to walk through
the Vindhya mountain when he saw the devil called
Kāṇabhūti. Telling everything to the devil Kāṇabhūti,
Vararuci started for Badaryāśrama to discard his body.
On the way he saw a hermit who lived on water alone.
In the meanwhile his finger was cut with the tip of
Darbha grass and blood oozed from the wound. Vara-
ruci, by his attainments, changed the blood into the
juice of a pot-herb. The hermit cried out “Oh, I have
become a man of attainments.” With a laugh
Vararuci said “You have not yet overcome your egoism.
I did so to test you. First of all you must overcome
your egoism and become wise.”
<div n="NI"/>After saying this Vararuci went to Badaryāśrama and
reached there. He did penance there and Devī appear-
ed. According to her advice he made a fire by contem-
plation and burned his body in it. Then Vararuci
became the old Puṣpadanta and went to the presence
of Śiva.
<LEND>
