<L>8228<pc>846-a<k1>विभीषण<k2>विभीषण<h>I
VIBHĪṢAṆA I¦. Brother of Rāvaṇa. The son Viśravas
was born to Prajāpati Pulastya. Rāvaṇa, Kumbhakarṇa
and Vibhīṣaṇa were born to Viśravas by his wife Mālinī.
A daughter named Śūrpaṇakhā also was born to them.
Kumbhakarṇa and Vibhīṣaṇa went to do penance under
the leadership of their eldest brother Rāvaṇa. They
did severe penance and obtained various boons. The
boon given to Vibhīṣaṇa was to live as a righteous
man. After that they came back and defeated Kubera,
the ruler of Laṅkā and brought Laṅkā under
their control. Rāvaṇa became the ruler of Laṅkā.
Kumbhakarṇa and Vibhīṣaṇa lived with their brother
in Laṅkā. Rāvaṇa married Mandodarī. Kumbhakarṇa
took Vajrajvālā the daughter of Mahābali and Vibhī-
ṣaṇa took Saralā, the daughter of Śailūṣa a Gandharva
as their wives, according to Uttara Rāmāyaṇa. Rāvaṇa
conquered the three worlds and was ruling as the
emperor of the whole world, when Śrī Rāma and Lakṣ-
maṇa went to the forest, with Sītā. Rāvaṇa carried Sītā
away to Laṅkā. Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, with the help
of the monkey-army entered Laṅkā. At this time Rāvaṇa
called together his ministers to consider the details about
the battle with Śrī Rāma. Every one present except
Vibhīṣaṇa voted for the battle. Vibhīṣaṇa advised
Rāvaṇa to return Śītā, the stolen property and beg Śrī
Rāma for pardon. Rāvaṇa got angry and expelled
Vibhīṣaṇa from Laṅkā. Vibhīṣaṇa joined the side of
Śrī Rāma and informed him of all the military secrets
of Rāvaṇa. In the battle which ensued Rāvaṇa was
killed and Vibhīṣaṇa was made the king of Laṅkā by
Śrī Rāma. It is stated in Kambarāmāyaṇa, Yuddha
Kāṇḍa that according to the instruction of Śrī Rāma
and at the instance of Indra, Viśvakarmā came to
Laṅkā and renovated the city of Laṅkā.
<div n="NI"/>Śrī Rāma returned to Ayodhyā and became the king.
One day Candragupta, the second son of Sahasramukha
Rāvaṇa (Rāvaṇa with thousand heads) stole away the
daughter of Sugrīva and the daughter-in-law of Vibhī-
[Page846-b+ 64]
ṣaṇa. Vibhīṣaṇa informed Śrī Rāma of this. Śrī Rāma,
with Lakṣmaṇa, Vibhīṣaṇa, Sugrīva, Hanūmān and
the monkey-army went to the city of Sahasramukha
Rāvaṇa in the middle of Milk-sea. A fierce battle ensued
which lasted for three days. All the Rākṣaṣas were
killed. (See under Sahasramukharāvaṇa).
<div n="NI"/>It is mentioned in Kamba Rāmāyaṇa that in the horse
sacrifice performed by Śrī Rāma, the control of the
army was in the hands of Sugrīva and financial control
was vested in the hands of Vibhīṣaṇa.
<LEND>
