<L>8304<pc>852-b<k1>विहुण्ड<k2>विहुण्ड
VIHUṆḌA¦. An asura. This asura was the son of the mighty
and great Asura Huṇḍa. At the time of the fierce battle
between the devas and the asuras, this mighty asura
Huṇḍa and Nahuṣa confronted each other and Huṇḍa
was killed. After this Vihuṇḍa, the son of Huṇḍa fought
with Nahuṣa. In the earlier part of the battle Vihuṇḍa
and his army suffered defeat. Vihuṇḍa began to do
penance in order to defeat the Devas who got terrified
at this and went to Mahāviṣṇu and prayed for protect-
ion. Viṣṇu consoled them saying that he would take
necessary steps. When the Devas were gone, Viṣṇu took
the form of a beautiful woman and went in search of
Vihuṇḍa. They met each other in the garden Nandana.
Vihuṇḍa fell in love with her. He wanted to marry her.
She said, “Oh, Handsome Vihuṇḍa, I have no objection
to be your wife. But there is a condition, you, must
gather seven crores of Kāmoda flowers and offer them
as oblation to Śiva, and then make a garland of
Kāmoda flowers and put it on my neck. From that
day onwards I am yours.”
<div n="NI"/>Vihuṇḍa agreed to it. He went for the flowers. He
wandered over forests and mountains. Nobody had any
idea of such a tree or flower. Thinking that this condi-
tion, laid by the damsel, was a deceit played upon him,
[Page853-a+ 65]
he stood perplexed when the hermit Śukra saw him.
He told the hermit everything. Then Śukra told him,
“Kāmoda is neither a tree nor a flower. She is goddess
who came up from the sea of Milk at the time of the
churning. She dwells at Gaṅgādvāra. When she laughs
pure white fragrant flowers fall from her lips, on the
water of Gaṅgā, every moment. When she is sad, the
flowers that fall from her lips will be red.”
<div n="NI"/>Vihuṇḍa started for Gaṅgādvāra. Nārada knew this.
He came to Vihuṇḍa and said, “It is difficult to reach
Gaṅgādvāra and please Kāmodā, and obtain the flower.
So the easiest way is to gather the flowers that come
down through the water of Gaṅgā.” Vihuṇḍa agreed.
He took his seat on the bank of Gaṅgā and waited for
the flowers to come.
<div n="NI"/>Nārada decided to cause harm to Vihuṇḍa. So he went
to Kāmodā and by way of telling her news, he inform-
ed her that the hermit Bhṛgu had cursed Mahāviṣṇu
and changed him into a man. On hearing this Kāmodā
began to cry. Red flowers fell from her lips. They were
carried down in cluster by the water of Gaṅgā. Vihuṇḍa
gathered them and went to the dwelling place of Śiva.
Śiva and Pārvatī saw this by their inward eyes. Pārvatī
did not like the idea of offering red flowers at the feet
of her beloved husband. Śiva found out a remedy for
it. He advised Pārvatī to offer pure white flowers at his
feet standing as a boy. Vihuṇḍa came with red flowers
Pārvatī appeared in the form of a boy. Both began to
vie with each other in offering flowers at the feet of
Śiva. Gradually it changed to a fight between the boy
and Vihuṇḍa. In the fight Vihuṇḍa was killed. (Padma
Purāṇa, Bhūmi khaṇḍa, some chapters from 119).
<LEND>
