<L>8343<pc>855-a<k1>विकुक्षि<k2>विकुक्षि
VIKUKṢI¦. A son of Ikṣvāku. It is said that Ikṣvāku
was born from the spittle of Manu. It is stated in Devī
Bhāgavata, Skandha 7, that after the death of Śaryāti,
the Rākṣasas (giants) attacked Ayodhyā and the sons
of the King having fled to different directions, Ikṣvāku
continued the dynasty of Śaryāti in Ayodhyā. Hundred
sons beginning with Vikukṣi, were born to Ikṣvāku.
Of these hundred sons fifty were employed to rule
over the regions of East and North and fortyeight, to
rule over the regions in the south and the west. With
the remaining two sons the King stayed in Ayodhyā,
and carried on administration.
<div n="NI"/>One day King Ikṣvāku resolved to conduct the great
sacrifice of offering to the manes called Mahāpralaya-
śrāddha, for which preparations were speedily made.
The hermits such as Vasiṣṭha and others arrived
according to invitation. He sent his son Vikukṣi to the
forest to bring the required amount of flesh for the
sacrifice. Vikukṣi entered the forest and hunted hare,
hog, deer etc. and collected the required quantity of
flesh; but on the way home, he became tired of hunger.
To appease his hunger he took a small hare from the
collection cooked it and ate it. He took the balance to
the King who was much pleased with his son and gave
the animals to Vasiṣṭha the family priest for prokṣaṇa
(sprinkling of holy water on the animals before sacri-
fice). But Vasiṣṭha got angry and said, “flesh which
constitutes remains is not acceptable.” The king
understood the truth only then. He was filled with
anger and distress. He expelled Vikukṣi from his
country for this misdeed. Thus because he had eaten
a Śaśa (hare) Vikukṣi got another name Śaśāda.
Śaśāda not at all caring about the misfortune that be-
fell him, went to the forest and lived on fruits and
roots and worshipped Devī, with ardent devotion.
<div n="NI"/>Ikṣvāku died. Śaśāda knew this and returned to
Ayodhyā and assumed reign. He performed several
[Page855-b+ 63]
sacrifices on the banks of river Sarayū. The famous
Kakutstha was the son of this Vikukṣi. (Devī
Bhāgavata, Skandha 7).
<LEND>
