<L>8407<pc>859-b<k1>विराध<k2>विराध
VIRĀDHA¦. A fierce Rākṣasa (giant) whom Rāma and
Lakṣmaṇa killed in the Daṇḍaka forest. Virādha was
the rebirth of Tumburu, a Gandharva who had been
cursed to become a Rākṣasa. The story about Śrī
Rāma's liberating the Gandharva from the curse and
sending him back to the world of Gandharvas, occurs
in Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, Araṇya Kāṇḍa, Sargas 2 to 4,
as follows.
<div n="NI"/>In days of old, Tumburu, a Gandharva had been serv-
ing Kubera. Once Tumburu was asked by Kubera to
bring Rambhā. Tumburu failed in bringing Rambhā
at the stipulated time. Kubera got angry and cursed
Tumburu to become a Rākṣasa. Tumburu requested
for liberation from the curse. Kubera granted his
request and said “In Tretāyuga, Mahāviṣṇu will
incarnate as Śrī Rāma, who with his sword will change
your Rākṣasa form. You will regain your former form
and will come back to the world of Gandharvas.”
<div n="NI"/>Accordingly Tumburu took birth as the son of giant
Jaya. This child born to Jaya by his wife Śatahradā,
grew up and came to be known by the name Virādha.
Two extra-ordinarily long hands and the outward
appearances of a giant aroused fear in every living
creature. He lived in the forest Daṇḍaka. It was at
this time that Śrī Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa came with Sītā,
to live in this forest. As soon as Virādha saw them he
ran to them with a loud cry.
<div n="NI"/>“With sunken eyes and swollen stomach, widened
mouth and an enormous body, with a fierce appearance,
of very great height an uncouth figure, body wet with
fat, clad in the hide of a leopard, looking like Yama
with open mouth, with three lions, two wolves, four
leopards, ten spotted deer and the head of a big tusker
with tusks smeared with fat, all these caught pierced
in an iron trident, and shouting in a roaring sound”,
he ran to them and after taking Sītā, he began to run.
Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa followed him. Virādha placed
Sītā down and, taking Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa on each
of his shoulders he began running. Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa
cut off each of his hands. But Virādha did not die.
Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa decided to bury him alive.
Virādha recognized Śrī Rāma and told him his story.
Instantly his demoniac form changed and he regained
his original form of a Gandharva. Thus Tumburu
returned to the world of Devas. (See under Tumburu).
<LEND>
