<L>8498<pc>867-b<k1>विष्णुदत्त<k2>विष्णुदत्त
VIṢṆUDATTA¦. Son of the Brahmin named Vasudatta.
The story of Viṣṇudatta is quoted to prove that bad
omens at the beginning of a journey is a warning that
the journey would not be fruitful and that it would be
rather dangerous.
<div n="NI"/>When Viṣṇudatta became sixteen years old he decided
to go to the city of Valabhī for his education. Seven Brah-
min boys of his age gathered together and joined him.
Deciding not to separate from each other, they started for
Valabhī, without the knowledge of their parents. When
they proceeded a little further they saw a bad omen.
Viṣṇudatta stood undecided, but the others pressed him
on and they continued their journey. Next day by even-
ing they reached a village of forest tribes. After walking
through the village they reached the house of a woman.
They got her permission to stay there for the night.
They all lay in a corner. Immediately all slept. Viṣṇu-
datta alone lay awake. When the night advanced, a
man entered the house. The woman and the man
talked for a while and carried on sexual sports, and
they lay together and slept. A light was burning in the
room. Viṣṇudatta saw everything through the cleavage
of the shutters, and thought. “I am sorry that we have
come to this house. He is not her husband. Sure! she is
a harlot.” As he was thinking thus, foot-steps were
heard in the courtyard. A young man fixed his
servants in their places. Then he entered the house and
saw Viṣṇudatta and his friends. The new-comer was
also a forest-man. He had a sword in his hand. He was
the owner of the house. Viṣṇudatta said that they were
travellers. When he heard it, without saying anything
he got inside and saw his wife sleeping with her lover.
With the sword in his hand, he cut off the head of the
lover. He did not kill the woman, who did not know
that her lover was killed. The forester laid the sword
down and lay in the same bed and slept. The light was
burning.
<div n="NI"/>After a while the woman woke up, and saw her hus-
band who had cut her lover into two. She stood up
quickly and took the trunk of her lover and placed it
on her shoulder and taking the head in one hand, went
out and hid them in the pile of ashes. Then she return-
ed and lay down. Viṣṇudatta had followed her steal-
thily and seen what she had done. He also returned and
sat in the midst of his friends. She rose up and took the
sword of her husband and killed him with it. Then
coming out she cried aloud. “Oh dear! These travellers
have killed my husband.” The servants woke up and
came to the house and saw their master lying dead.
They tried to attack Viṣṇudatta and his friends.
Viṣṇudatta told them everything that he had seen, and
showed them the head and the trunk of her lover, hid-
den in the ashes. When they saw this they understood
[Page868-a+ 64]
everything. They tried the woman. At last she admitted
the crime. They expelled her and drove her away. After
this the travellers returned to their homes. (Kathāsarit-
sāgara, Madanamañcukālambaka, Taraṅga 6).
<LEND>
