<L>8719<pc>893-b<k1>यमजिह्वा<k2>यमजिह्वा
YAMAJIHVĀ¦. A prostitute. In Kathāsaritsāgara,
Śaktiyaśolambaka, 1st Taraṅga, there is a story about
her as follows:—
<div n="NI"/>In the city of Citrakūṭa Ratnavarmā a wealthy Vaiśya,
had a son named Īśvaravarmā. In order to avoid his
son falling under the influence of prostitutes, the father
decided to teach “veśyātantram”, to Īśvaravarmā
while he was a boy. Yamajihvā, the prostitute under-
took this task for a reward of 1000 Niṣkas. (a gold coin
of that time).
<div n="NI"/>After completing his education on the wiles and tricks
of prostitutes, he was sent by his father to start a trade
with a capital of five crores of Niṣkas. Īśvaravarmā
and his friend Arthadatta on their way, stopped at a
park on the outskirts of the city of Kāñcanapura.
There he fell a victim to the bewitching charms of a
prostitute named Sundarī. He spent the lion's share of
the money given by his father, on her. On the advice of
his friend Arthadatta he was about to leave the place
when Sundarī pretended to be in danger of falling into
a well and asked for his help. Īśvaravarmā was again
caught in her trap and he was forced to spend the res
of his money also on her. When he was rendered penni-
less the prostitute and her mother deserted him.
<div n="NI"/>Īśvaravarmā returned home to his father, empty-hand-
ed. Ratnavarmā took his son to Yamajihvā again and
told her the whole story. He said that his son fell into
this plight because Yamajihvā's training was not effect-
ive. After listening to the whole story, Yamajihvā
promised to recover the whole amount lost by Īśvara-
varmā. She brought her trained monkey named “Āla”
and placed 1,000 Niṣkas before him. She taught him to
swallow the whole amount. After that, she taught him
to give out by vomiting, the swallowed money in instal-
ments of twenty, thirty, forty etc., as ordered. Then
Yamajihvā said to Īśvaravarmā:—“Take this monkey
with you and go to Sundarī's place. Make him swallow
the money in secret and get it again from him, in
instalments, in her presence. She would think that the
monkey is an inexhaustible source of wealth and
would be prepared to buy it at any cost—even
by offering her whole wealth in return. At first you
must pretend to be unwilling to part with the monkey.
In the end, you must make him swallow 2,000 Niṣkas
which he would be able to give out in two days at the
rate of 1,000 on each day. Exchange him for her whole
wealth and leave the place immediately.”
<div n="NI"/>With this advice Yamajihvā sent Īśvaravarmā with the
monkey. He went to Kāñcanapura in the company of
his friend Arthadatta after receiving two crores of Niṣkas
from his father. When Sundarī knew that Īśvaravarmā
had come again with more money, she welcomed him
with due respect and invited him to live with her. He
accepted her invitation and took up his residence there.
One day, he brought the monkey into the house and in
the presence of Sundarī asked him to produce various
amounts of money for different purposes.
<div n="NI"/>The monkey promptly vomited the various amounts
separately without making any mistake. Sundarī and
her mother Makarakaṭī were naturally amazed at the
[Page894-a+ 65]
marvellous performance of the monkey. Īśvaravarmā
explained that the monkey was capable of giving in this
way, 1,000 Niṣkas daily. Sundarī made up her mind to
purchase the wonderful animal at any price. She request-
ed Īśvaravarmā to give her the monkey in exchange for
the crores of Niṣkas she had taken from him earlier.
But he turned down her request. At last she persuaded
him to sell the monkey to her for the entire wealth she
possessed. Īśvaravarmā secretly made the monkey
swallow 2,000 Niṣkas before handing it over to Sundarī
and left the place at once to go to Svarṇadvīpa for
trade.
<div n="NI"/>Āla, the monkey gave Sundarī 1,000 Niṣkas on each of
the first two days, but on the third day she was disillu-
sioned. In her disappointment and anger, she beat Ālan.
The enraged monkey attacked both Sundarī and
Makarakaṭī and harmed them by biting and tearing
with its nails. They in turn, beat him to death. Thus
Sundarī lost all her ill-gotten wealth and was reduced to
utter poverty and distress.
<LEND>
