<L>926<pc>105-a<k1>बालि<k2>बालि
BĀLI¦. A mighty monkey-king.
<div n="NI"/>1) {%Birth.%} Bāli is the son of Indra. There is a story
about the birth of Bāli as follows:—
<div n="NI"/>Śīlavatī who was devoted to her husband once carried
her husband Ugratapas who was a leper, on her shoul-
der to the house of a harlot one night. On the way
they saw the hermit Aṇimāṇḍavya, who had been
placed on a trident by the order of the King, beating
his limbs with agony. Lying on the trident he saw
Ugratapas. Seeing the amorous nature of Ugratapas
Aṇimāṇḍavya cursed him that before sunrise he would
die. Śīlavatī who was a woman of great purity and
loyalty hearing the curse said, “Let the Sun not rise
tomorrow.”
<div n="NI"/>Next day, though it was time the sun did not rise. The
night prolonged. Aruṇa the charioteer was ready at the
usual time but saw the Sun sitting motionless. Wast-
ing time was intolerable to the charioteer. So he decid-
ed to make the best use of the time at his disposal by
witnessing a little of the dance of the celestial beauties
in the realm of the devas. But males had no admittance
there. So Aruṇa took the shape of a beautiful woman
and got in. Seeing a new person, very beautiful to
look at, sitting in the midst of the celestial maids Indra
grew amorous. He secretly took her to a dark place
and a son was born out of that coition. That son is Bāli.
When Aruṇa returned the Sun was standing full of
anger. Being afraid of him Aruṇa confessed everything
to the Sun. When he heard the whole story the Sun
expressed his desire to see that figure which Aruṇa had
adopted. Accordingly Aruṇa again became a woman.
The Sun also had coition with her and Sugrīva was
the son born out of this coition. Bāli and Sugrīva
were brought up by Ahalyādevī in the hermitage of
Gautama.
<div n="NI"/>At that time a monkey-king named Ṛkṣarāja had been
ruling over the forest with Kiṣkindha as his capital.
He had no sons and so he approached Indra and placed
before him his grievances. Indra brought Bāli and
[Page105-b+ 65]
Sugrīva from the hermitage of Gautama and handed
them over to Ṛkṣarajas. (M.B., Ādi Parva, Chapter 107;
Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa, Chapter 42; Uttara Rāmāyaṇa
and Kampa Rāmāyaṇa, Pūrvakāṇḍa).
<div n="NI"/>2) {%Marriage and Kingship.%} Owing to difference of opini-
on, Bāli defeated the asuras who came for the churning
of the Sea of Milk. The devas who were pleased at
this, gave Bāli, a woman named Tārā, derived from
the Sea of Milk. Thus Tārā became his wife and he got
a son by her, named Aṅgada who became famous as a
mighty warrior-prince. Sugrīva married Rumā. At that
time Ṛkṣarāja died and Bāli became King. (Kampa
Rāmāyaṇa, Pūrvakāṇḍa).
<div n="NI"/>3) {%Enmity with Hanūmān.%} It was during this period
that Hanumān was born. While Śiva and Pārvatī were
living in the forest as monkeys Pārvatī got with child.
The child was given to Bhagavān Vāyu (Wind-God)
with the womb. Vāyu placed the womb with the child
in Añjanā Devī's stomach. Nārada informed Bāli all these
things. Bāli thought that his position would be lost, if
a being born of Śiva, grew up in the form of a monkey.
In accordance with the advice of Nārada, Bāli melted
Pañcaloha (Five metals) and passed it into the womb
of Añjanā. Still the child in the womb was not killed
as it was the sperm of Śiva. The molten metals became
earrings of the child in the womb. (Kampa Rāmāyaṇa,
Pūrvakāṇḍa).
<div n="NI"/>4) {%Sugrīva separated.%} Once, the son of Maya, the car-
penter of the asuras, wanted to defeat Bāli by a
combat or cunning sleights as he was an expert wrest-
ler and magician. He came to Kiṣkindhā in the mid-
night and standing before the palace, challenged Bāli,
who getting angry came out followed by Sugrīva. See-
ing the two of them the magician began to run. Bāli
and Sugrīva chased him to a cave. Placing Sugrīva at
the mouth of the cave Bāli followed the magician. Be-
fore going, Bāli said to Sugrīva: “Brother, I will go in
and kill the Magician and return. Be brave and stay
here. If the asura dies milk will appear at the mouth
of the cave and if he kills me blood will be seen. If the
latter happens close the mouth of the cave firmly and
return to Kiṣkindhā and live happily there.”
<div n="NI"/>Bāli did not return even after a year. Finally the asura
was killed. But by the cunning sleights of the magician
it was blood that appeared at the mouth of the cave.
Thinking that his brother was slain by the magician
Sugrīva felt sorry. Then he closed the mouth of the cave
firmly with stone and returned to Kiṣkīndhā. Hearing
about the death of Bāli the monkeys anointed Sugrīva
as King. After a time Bāli returned stronger than before
and saw the mouth of the cave closed. He thought that
Sugrīva had closed the mouth of the cave deliberately
to kill him and to usurp his throne. Bāli reached
Kiṣkindhā and drove Sugrīva away. Śugrīva fled to
Mount Ṛśyamūkācala which was prohibited area for
Bāli due to a curse. Mātaṅga had cursed him that if
he entered that mountain his head would be broken.
So Sugrīva was safe in that mountain.
<div n="NI"/>The desire of Bāli to take revenge on Sugrīva increased
everyday. Everyday he used to go to the four sea-
shores and conduct bath, prayer, meditation etc. and
return to Kiṣkindhā within a short time. With one
jump he will reach one place from another, and in
each jump he would put one step on the head of
Sugrīva in the Ṛśyamūkācala. Hanumān was the
[Page106-a+ 65]
minister of Sugrīva. He was much annoyed at this
habitual torture of Sugrīva. One day as usual Bāli
was stepping on the head of Sugrīva to jump to another
place, when Hanumān caught hold of Bāli by his waist.
Hanumān thought that if Bāli was dragged down on
the mountain somehow or other, his head would break
and there would be an end of his wicked deeds. Bāli
thought that if he could jump into Kiṣkindhā with
Hanumān it would be easy for him to destroy Sugrīva.
But both were of equal strength. So Bālī did not jump
with Hanumān to Kiṣkindhā and Hanumān did not
drag Bāli to the ground. Both did not know how to
stop the fight. At last they made a treaty. Bāli agreed
to stop torturing Sugrīva and Hanumān agreed not to
cause any trouble to Bāli. Both returned to their own
places. After that Sugrīva lived in Ṛśyamūkācala with
his ministers and Bāli in Kiṣkindhā. (Vālmīki Rāmā-
yaṇa, Kiṣkindhā Kāṇḍa, Sarga 10; Kampa Rāmāyaṇa,
Pūrvakāṇḍa).
<div n="NI"/>5) Bāli was cursed by Mātaṅga the great hermit. See
the word Dundubhi para 4.
<div n="NI"/>6) {%Defeating Rāvaṇa.%} Bāli had got a boon from the
Gods that he would get half the strength of his oppo-
nent who stood face to face with him in fight. This
power enabled Bāli to defeat all his foes and bring the
countries in all directions under his sway. Rāvaṇa heard
about this and decided to overpower Bāli somehow or
other and approached Kiṣkindhā. Bāli knew this. His
minister, Tāran, went to Rāvaṇa and told him about
the power of Bāli and of the boon by which Bāli got
half the strength of his opponent. When Rāvaṇa heard
of this peculiar boon he decided to kill Bāli. His idea
was to kill Bāli by going behind him when he went to
the sea-shore to take bath in the morning.
<div n="NI"/>Next morning Bāli went to the eastern sea-shore and
began his prayer and meditation. Rāvaṇa approached
Bāli from behind and sat close to him. Perhaps the
idea of Rāvaṇa might have been to take Bāli by his
tail and beat him on the ground. Bāli knew that
Rāvaṇa was sitting behind him. But pretending that
he knew nothing put his long tail on the body of
Rāvaṇa, and passed it lengthwise and breadthwise
through every part of his body and tied him like a
bundle of faggots, and made a jump into the air.
Within a short time he visited all the usual places and
reached Kiṣkindhā. Seeing Rāvaṇa hanging by the
tail of Bāli, even the women folk laughed. Thus
Rāvaṇa admitted defeat. Bāli let him go unhurt.
(Uttara Rāmāyaṇa).
<div n="NI"/>7) {%Death.%} After Sītā had been stolen away Rāma
and Lakṣmaṇa wandered about in the forest. Then
they met with Hanumān, who took them to his King
Sugrīva. Śrī Rāma and Sugrīva entered into a treaty,
by which Śrī Rāma was to kill Bāli and to restore to
Sugrīva his wife who was under the custody of Bāli, and
to make him the King of Kiṣkindhā, in return for
which Sugrīva and his men had to help Śrī Rāma to
find out and recover Sītā. In accordance with the con-
ditions of the treaty, Śrī Rāma and Sugrīva reached
Kiṣkindhā, to confront with Bāli. Śrī Rāma and Sug-
rīva had hit up on a plan, by which Śrī Rāma was to
shoot Bāli down, when Sugrīva was engaged in boxing
with Bāli. Sugrīva challenged Bāli to a single combat.
Bāli came out and a horrible boxing began between the
two. But Srī Rāma could not distinguish one from
[Page106-b+ 64]
the other. Thier faces were so alike. Sugrīva, being
defeated, receded from fight. Śrī Rāma and Sugrīva
returned to Ṛśyamūkācala. Surgīva spoke ill of Śrī
Rāma. But Śrī Rāma revealed the truth, and Sugrīva
believed it. Next day morning both of them started for
Kiṣkindhā to kill Bāli. Śrī Rāma had put a flower
garland around the neck of Sugrīva to distinguish him
from Bāli. This time Tārā tried to the utmost to dis-
suade Bāli from fighting. But without paying any heed
to her words Bāli engaged Sugrīva in fighting. Śrī
Rāma, sitting in ambush, instantly sent an arrow to
the breast of Bāli who looked to the side from which
the arrow came. Before falling down, looking at Śrī
Rāma Bāli said “It is not right on the part of the King
of Ayodhyā to have shot an arrow from ambush”.
Hearing that Śrī Rāma said, “If you see me face to face
you will become devoted to me. It is not right to kill
one's devotee. You are a friend of Rāvaṇa, who as you
know, is my foe. If I let you alone Rāvaṇa is likely to
get your help. Besides, you have a boon that you will
get half the strength of the foe who faces you, and as
such you cannot be killed by anybody in direct fight.
It is unavoidable for the safety of Sugrīva, for my
interest, for the protection of the world at large, and
for the preservation of law and order that you should
be killed. Was it not a violation of duty on your part
to steal the wife of Sugrīva?”
<div n="NI"/>Bāli fell down. Immediately Tārādevī and Aṅgada
arrived there. Tārā spoke very harsh words to Śrī
Rāma. At last Bāli entrusted Tārā and Aṅgada with
Śrī Rāma and then he died. (Kampa Rāmāyaṇa,
Kiṣkindhākāṇḍa).
<LEND>
