<L>985<pc>110-b<k1>भद्रश्रवस्<k2>भद्रश्रवस्
BHADRAŚRAVAS¦. A king whom the Purāṇas extol as
having ruled Saurāṣṭra in Dvāparayuga. At the forest
of Naimiśa sage Sūta told the following story to explain
how Lakṣmī (goddess of wealth) took her abode in the
houses of men.
<div n="NI"/>Bhadraśravā (Bhadraśravas) who was ruling Saurāṣṭra
had seven sons and a daughter of his wife Suraticand-
rikā. The daughter was named Śyāmabālā. Once
truthful-Śyāmabālā was sitting under a green-wood tree
with her playmates playing with diamonds and gold
sand when the goddess of wealth disguised as an aged
brahmin woman went to the gates of the palace and asked
for permission to see the queen, Suraticandrikā. The
sentries pressed for details about her and then she said
this: “My name is Kamalā. My husband is a man named
Bhuvanāśva and we live in Dvārakā. Your queen in her
previous birth was a Vaiśya woman. One day she quar-
relled with her husband and he beat her hard and then
crying loudly she ran out of the house. I met her and
when she told me her story I instructed her to observe
a Puṇyavrata (Fasting to any particular deity). She did
it willingly and as a result she acquired great wealth
and happiness.
<div n="NI"/>One day the husband and wife died. Yama, the king
of Death, then sent his orderlies to bring before him
that couple who had always quarrelled with each other
while living. Bound by ropes the ghastly servants of
Yama were about to drag them to their land when the
angelic servants of Viṣṇu with the insignia of ‘Śaṃkha-
Cakra-Gadā’ on their lapels arrived there and those
messengers of Lakṣmī headed by Svaprakāśa cut off the
ropes and carrying them in a Rājahaṃsa chariot took
them through noble paths to the land of Lakṣmī. They
lived there happily for a period calculated at the rate of
a thousand years for one week of Puṇyavrata observed.
In the end to complete the goodness remaining they
were born as King and queen on earth with plenty
of wealth and happiness. But they have now forgotten
about the Puṇyavrata and I have come here to remind
them of it.”
<div n="NI"/>The gate-keeper immediately went to her mistress and
told her all that happened. But the queen, Suraticand-
rikā got angry when she heard the story and ordered
the old woman to be sent away from there with thrash-
es. The old woman ran away from the palace crying
loudly and Śyāmabālā on hearing the cry went and
[Page111-a+ 65]
enquired about the incident. On hearing the story
from the woman Śyāmabālā got instructions regarding
that Puṇyavrata from the old woman and started
observing it. Within four weeks she got married and
went to her husband's house. After Śyāmabālā's depar-
ture from the palace the wealth of the King began to
wane and they became so poor that at the request of the
queen the King Bhadraśravā went to his daughter to ask
for help. The daughter gave his father a block of solid
gold draped in a paper. But on his return to the
palace when he opened the bundle he found there a
block of charcoal instead of gold. On seeing the mis-
hap the king burst into a cry.
<div n="NI"/>Suraticandrikā then went to her daughter and was well
received and attended to. During her stay there the
Puṇyavrata day of the month came and the daughter
tried her best to make her mother also observe the
same. But the poverty-stricken queen broke the fast
without her daughter's knowledge by eating what re-
mained in the dishes of the children. But the next
month Śyāmabālā compelled her mother to observe the
fast strictly and so Suraticandrikā took the Vrata
successfully. A few days after that Suraticandrikā re-
turned home and to her amazement found everything
in plenty there once more. (Chapter 11, Bhaga 2,
Padma Purāṇa).
<LEND>
